Imperium Romanum (Latin)Senatus populusque RomanusSenate and People of Rome[n 1]Βασιλεία Ῥωμαίων (Ancient Greek)Basileía Rhōmaíōn

RomeConstantinople

also:Antioch, Arelate,Augusta Treverorum,Mediolanum, Nicomedia,Ravenna, Sirmium

Latin
Greek
numerous others

Roman polytheismHellenistic polytheismImperial cultnumerous othersofficial from AD 380:Christianity

Roman SenateByzantine Senate

a Officially the final emperor of the Western empire.b Last emperor of the Eastern (Byzantine) empire.c Abbreviated "HS". Prices and values are usually expressed in sesterces; see below for currency denominations by period.

The history of the Roman Empire covers the history of ancient Rome from the traditional end of the Roman Republic in 27 BC until the abdication of Romulus Augustulus in AD 476 in the West, and the Fall of Constantinople in the East in 1453. Ancient Rome became a territorial empire while still a republic, but was then ruled by emperors beginning with Octavian Augustus, the final victor of the republican civil wars.

Rome had begun expanding shortly after the founding of the Republic in the 6th century BC, though it did not expand outside the Italian Peninsula until the 3rd century BC, during the Punic Wars, after which the Republic expanded across the Mediterranean.[5][6][7][8] Civil war engulfed Rome in the mid-1st century BC, first between Julius Caesar and Pompey, and finally between Octavian (Caesar's grand-nephew) and Mark Antony. Antony was defeated at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC, leading to the annexation of Egypt. In 27 BC, the Senate gave Octavian the titles of Augustus ("venerated") and Princeps ("foremost"), thus beginning the Principate, the first epoch of Roman imperial history. Augustus' name was inherited by his successors, as well as his title of Imperator ("commander"), from which the term "emperor" is derived. Early emperors avoided any association with the ancient kings of Rome, instead presenting themselves as leaders of the Republic.

The success of Augustus in establishing principles of dynastic succession was limited by his outliving a number of talented potential heirs; the Julio-Claudian dynasty lasted for four more emperors—Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, and Nero—before it yielded in AD 69 to the strife-torn Year of the Four Emperors, from which Vespasian emerged as victor. Vespasian became the founder of the brief Flavian dynasty, to be followed by the Nerva–Antonine dynasty which produced the "Five Good Emperors": Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius and the philosophically inclined Marcus Aurelius. In the view of the Greek historian Cassius Dio, a contemporary observer, the accession of the emperor Commodus in AD 180 marked the descent "from a kingdom of gold to one of rust and iron"[9]—a famous comment which has led some historians, notably Edward Gibbon, to take Commodus' reign as the beginning of the decline of the Roman Empire.

In 212, during the reign of Caracalla, Roman citizenship was granted to all freeborn inhabitants of the Empire. Despite this gesture of universality, the Severan dynasty was tumultuous—an emperor's reign was ended routinely by his murder or execution—and following its collapse, the Empire was engulfed by the Crisis of the Third Century, a 50-year period of invasions, civil strife, economic disorder, and epidemic disease.[10] In defining historical epochs, this crisis is typically viewed as marking the start of the Later Roman Empire,[11] and also the transition from Classical to Late antiquity. In the reign of Philip the Arab (r. 244–249), Rome celebrated its thousandth anniversary with the Saecular Games. Diocletian (r. 284–305) restored stability to the empire, modifying the role of princeps and adopting the style of dominus, "master" or "lord",[12] thus beginning the period known as the Dominate. Diocletian's reign also brought the Empire's most concerted effort against Christianity, the "Great Persecution". The state of absolute monarchy that began with Diocletian endured until the fall of the Eastern Roman Empire in 1453.

In 286, the empire was split into two halves, each with its own emperor and court. The empire was further divided into four regions in 293, beginning the Tetrarchy.[13] By this time, Rome itself was reduced to a symbolic status, as emperors ruled from different cities. Diocletian abdicated voluntarily along with his co-augustus, but the Tetrarchy almost immediately fell apart. The civil wars ended in 324 with the victory of Constantine I, who became the first emperor to convert to Christianity and who founded Constantinople as a new capital for the whole empire. The reign of Julian, who attempted to restore Classical Roman and Hellenistic religion, only briefly interrupted the succession of Christian emperors of the Constantinian dynasty. During the decades of the Valentinianic and Theodosian dynasties, the established practice of dividing the empire in two was continued. Theodosius I, the last emperor to rule over both the Eastern empire and the whole Western empire, died in 395 after making Christianity the official religion of the Empire.[14]

The Western Roman Empire began to disintegrate in the early 5th century as the Germanic migrations and invasions of the Migration Period overwhelmed the capacity of the Empire to assimilate the immigrants and fight off the invaders. Most chronologies place the end of the Western Roman Empire in 476, when Romulus Augustulus was forced to abdicate to the Germanic warlord Odoacer.[15] The Eastern empire exercised diminishing control over the west over the course of the next century and was reduced to Anatolia and the Balkans by the 7th. The empire in the east—known today as the Byzantine Empire, but referred to in its time as "Roman"—ended in 1453 with the death of Constantine XI and the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks (see History of the Byzantine Empire).

27 BC–AD 14: Augustus

Octavian, the grandnephew and adopted son of Julius Caesar, had made himself a central military figure during the chaotic period following Caesar's assassination. In 43 BC, at the age of twenty, he became one of the three members of the Second Triumvirate, a political alliance with Marcus Lepidus and Mark Antony.[16] Octavian and Antony defeated the last of Caesar's assassins in 42 BC at the Battle of Philippi, although after this point tensions began to rise between the two. The triumvirate ended in 32 BC, torn apart by the competing ambitions of its members: Lepidus was forced into exile and Antony, who had allied himself with his lover Queen Cleopatra VII of Egypt, committed suicide in 30 BC following his defeat at the Battle of Actium (31 BC) by the fleet of Octavian. Octavian subsequently annexed Egypt to the empire.[17]

Now sole ruler of Rome, Octavian began a full-scale reformation of military, fiscal and political matters. The Senate granted him power over appointing its membership and several successive consulships, allowing him to operate within the existing constitutional machinery and thus reject titles that Romans associated with monarchy, such as rex ("king"). The dictatorship, a military office in the early Republic typically lasting only for the six-month military campaigning season, had been resurrected first by Sulla in the late 80s BC and then by Julius Caesar in the mid-40s; the title dictator was never again used. As the adopted heir of Julius Caesar, Octavian had taken "Caesar" as a component of his name, and handed down the name to his heirs of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. With Galba, the first emperor outside the dynasty, Caesar evolved into a formal title.

Augustus created his novel and historically unique position by consolidating the constitutional powers of several Republican offices. He renounced his consulship in 23 BC, but retained his consular imperium, leading to a second compromise between Augustus and the Senate known as the Second settlement. Augustus was granted the authority of a tribune (tribunicia potestas), though not the title, which allowed him to call together the Senate and people at will and lay business before it, veto the actions of either the Assembly or the Senate, preside over elections, and it gave him the right to speak first at any meeting. Also included in Augustus's tribunician authority were powers usually reserved for the Roman censor; these included the right to supervise public morals and scrutinise laws to ensure they were in the public interest, as well as the ability to hold a census and determine the membership of the Senate. No tribune of Rome ever had these powers, and there was no precedent within the Roman system for consolidating the powers of the tribune and the censor into a single position, nor was Augustus ever elected to the office of Censor. Whether censorial powers were granted to Augustus as part of his tribunician authority, or he simply assumed those, is a matter of debate.

In addition to those powers, Augustus was granted sole imperium within the city of Rome itself; all armed forces in the city, formerly under the control of the prefects, were now under the sole authority of Augustus. Additionally, Augustus was granted imperium proconsulare maius (literally: "eminent proconsular command"), the right to interfere in any province and override the decisions of any governor. With imperium maius, Augustus was the only individual able to grant a triumph to a successful general as he was ostensibly the leader of the entire Roman army.

The Senate re-classified the provinces at the frontiers (where the vast majority of the legions were stationed) as imperial provinces, and gave control of those to Augustus. The peaceful provinces were re-classified as senatorial provinces, governed as they had been during the Republic by members of the Senate sent out annually by the central government.[18] Senators were prohibited from so much as visiting Roman Egypt, given its great wealth and history as a base of power for opposition to the new emperor. Taxes from the imperial provinces went into the fiscus, the fund administered by persons chosen by and answerable to Augustus. The revenue from senatorial provinces continued to be sent to the state treasury (aerarium), under the supervision of the Senate.

The Roman legions, which had reached an unprecedented 50 in number because of the civil wars, were reduced to 28. Several legions, particularly those with members of doubtful loyalties, were simply disbanded. Other legions were united, a fact hinted by the title Gemina (Twin).[19] Augustus also created nine special cohorts to maintain peace in Italia, with three, the Praetorian Guard, kept in Rome. Control of the fiscus enabled Augustus to ensure the loyalty of the legions through their pay.

Augustus completed the conquest of Hispania, while subordinate generals expanded Roman possessions in Africa and Asia Minor. Augustus' final task was to ensure an orderly succession of his powers. His stepson Tiberius had conquered Pannonia, Dalmatia, Raetia, and temporarily Germania for the Empire, and was thus a prime candidate. In 6 BC, Augustus granted some of his powers to his stepson,[20] and soon after he recognised Tiberius as his heir. In AD 13, a law was passed which extended Augustus' powers over the provinces to Tiberius,[21] so that Tiberius' legal powers were equivalent to, and independent from, those of Augustus.[21]

Attempting to secure the borders of the Empire upon the rivers Danube and Elbe, Augustus ordered the invasions of Illyria, Moesia, and Pannonia (south of the Danube), and Germania (west of the Elbe). At first everything went as planned, but then disaster struck. The Illyrian tribes revolted and had to be crushed, and three full legions under the command of Publius Quinctilius Varus were ambushed and destroyed at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in AD 9 by Germanic tribes led by Arminius. Being cautious, Augustus secured all territories west of the Rhine and contented himself with retaliatory raids. The rivers Rhine and Danube became the permanent borders of the Roman empire in the North.

In AD 14, Augustus died at the age of seventy-five, having ruled the Empire for forty years, and was succeeded as emperor by Tiberius.

Sources

The Augustan Age is not as well documented as the age of Caesar and Cicero. Livy wrote his history during Augustus's reign and covered all of Roman history through to 9 BC, but only epitomes survive of his coverage of the late Republican and Augustan periods. Important primary sources for the Augustan period include:

Res Gestae Divi Augusti, Augustus's highly partisan autobiography,
Historiae Romanae by Velleius Paterculus, the best annals of the Augustan period,
Controversiae and Suasoriae of Seneca the Elder.

Works of poetry such as Ovid's Fasti and Propertius's Fourth Book, legislation and engineering also provide important insights into Roman life of the time. Archaeology, including maritime archaeology, aerial surveys, epigraphic inscriptions on buildings, and Augustan coinage, has also provided valuable evidence about economic, social and military conditions.

Secondary ancient sources on the Augustan Age include Tacitus, Dio Cassius, Plutarch and Lives of the Twelve Caesars by Suetonius. Josephus's Jewish Antiquities is the important source for Judea, which became a province during Augustus's reign.

14–68: Julio-Claudian Dynasty

Augustus had three grandsons by his daughter Julia the Elder: Gaius Caesar, Lucius Caesar and Agrippa Postumus. None of the three lived long enough to succeed him. He therefore was succeeded by his stepson Tiberius. Tiberius was the son of Livia, the third wife of Augustus, by her first marriage to Tiberius Nero. Augustus was a scion of the gens Julia (the Julian family), one of the most ancient patrician clans of Rome, while Tiberius was a scion of the gens Claudia, only slightly less ancient than the Julians. Their three immediate successors were all descended both from the gens Claudia, through Tiberius' brother Nero Claudius Drusus, and from gens Julia, either through Julia the Elder, Augustus' daughter from his first marriage (Caligula and Nero), or through Augustus' sister Octavia Minor (Claudius). Historians thus refer to their dynasty as "Julio-Claudian".

14–37: Tiberius

The early years of Tiberius's reign were relatively peaceful. Tiberius secured the overall power of Rome and enriched its treasury. However, his rule soon became characterised by paranoia. He began a series of treason trials and executions, which continued until his death in 37.[22] He left power in the hands of the commander of the guard, Lucius Aelius Sejanus. Tiberius himself retired to live at his villa on the island of Capri in 26, leaving administration in the hands of Sejanus, who carried on the persecutions with contentment. Sejanus also began to consolidate his own power; in 31 he was named co-consul with Tiberius and married Livilla, the emperor's niece. At this point he was "hoist by his own petard": the emperor's paranoia, which he had so ably exploited for his own gain, turned against him. Sejanus was put to death, along with many of his associates, the same year. The persecutions continued until Tiberius' death in 37.

37–41: Caligula

At the time of Tiberius's death most of the people who might have succeeded him had been killed. The logical successor (and Tiberius' own choice) was his 24-year-old grandnephew, Gaius, better known as "Caligula" ("little boots"). Caligula was a son of Germanicus and Agrippina the Elder. His paternal grandparents were Nero Claudius Drusus and Antonia Minor, and his maternal grandparents were Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa and Julia the Elder. He was thus a descendant of both Augustus and Livia.

Caligula started out well, by putting an end to the persecutions and burning his uncle's records. Unfortunately, he quickly lapsed into illness. The Caligula that emerged in late 37 demonstrated features of mental instability that led modern commentators to diagnose him with such illnesses as encephalitis, which can cause mental derangement, hyperthyroidism, or even a nervous breakdown (perhaps brought on by the stress of his position). Whatever the cause, there was an obvious shift in his reign from this point on, leading his biographers to label him as insane.

Most of what history remembers of Caligula comes from Suetonius, in his book Lives of the Twelve Caesars. According to Suetonius, Caligula once planned to appoint his favourite horse Incitatus to the Roman Senate. He ordered his soldiers to invade Britain to fight the sea god Neptune, but changed his mind at the last minute and had them pick sea shells on the northern end of France instead. It is believed he carried on incestuous relations with his three sisters: Julia Livilla, Drusilla and Agrippina the Younger. He ordered a statue of himself to be erected in Herod's Temple at Jerusalem, which would have undoubtedly led to revolt had he not been dissuaded from this plan by his friend king Agrippa I. He ordered people to be secretly killed, and then called them to his palace. When they did not appear, he would jokingly remark that they must have committed suicide.

In 41, Caligula was assassinated by the commander of the guard Cassius Chaerea. Also killed were his fourth wife Caesonia and their daughter Julia Drusilla. For two days following his assassination, the Senate debated the merits of restoring the Republic.[23]

41–54: Claudius

Claudius was a younger brother of Germanicus, and had long been considered a weakling and a fool by the rest of his family. The Praetorian Guard, however, acclaimed him as emperor. Claudius was neither paranoid like his uncle Tiberius, nor insane like his nephew Caligula, and was therefore able to administer the Empire with reasonable ability. He improved the bureaucracy and streamlined the citizenship and senatorial rolls. He ordered the construction of a winter port at Ostia Antica for Rome, thereby providing a place for grain from other parts of the Empire to be brought in inclement weather.

Claudius ordered the suspension of further attacks across the Rhine,[24] setting what was to become the permanent limit of the Empire's expansion in that direction.[25] In 43, he resumed the Roman conquest of Britannia that Julius Caesar had begun in the 50s BC, and incorporated more Eastern provinces into the empire.

In his own family life, Claudius was less successful. His wife Messalina cuckolded him; when he found out, he had her executed and married his niece, Agrippina the Younger. She, along with several of his freedmen, held an inordinate amount of power over him, and although there are conflicting accounts about his death, she may very well have poisoned him in 54.[26] Claudius was deified later that year. The death of Claudius paved the way for Agrippina's own son, the 17-year-old Lucius Domitius Nero.

54–68: Nero

Nero ruled from 54 to 68. During his rule, Nero focused much of his attention on diplomacy, trade, and increasing the cultural capital of the empire. He ordered the building of theatres and promoted athletic games. His reign included the Roman–Parthian War (a successful war and negotiated peace with the Parthian Empire (58–63)), the suppression of a revolt led by Boudica in Britannia (60–61) and the improvement of cultural ties with Greece. However, he was egotistical and had severe troubles with his mother, who he felt was controlling and overbearing. After several attempts to kill her, he finally had her stabbed to death. He believed himself a god and decided to build an opulent palace for himself. The so-called Domus Aurea, meaning golden house in Latin, was constructed atop the burnt remains of Rome after the Great Fire of Rome (64). Because of the convenience of this many believe that Nero was ultimately responsible for the fire, spawning the legend of him fiddling while Rome burned which is almost certainly untrue. The Domus Aurea was a colossal feat of construction that covered a huge space and demanded new methods of construction in order to hold up the golden, jewel-encrusted ceilings. By this time Nero was hugely unpopular despite his attempts to blame the Christians for most of his regime's problems.

A military coup drove Nero into hiding. Facing execution at the hands of the Roman Senate, he reportedly committed suicide in 68. According to Cassius Dio, Nero's last words were "Jupiter, what an artist perishes in me!"[27][28]

68–69: Year of the Four Emperors

vte

Forum Julii
Locus Castorum
1st and 2nd Bedriacum
Revolt of the Batavi

Since he had no heir, Nero's suicide was followed by a brief period of civil war, known as the "Year of the Four Emperors". Between June 68 and December 69, Rome witnessed the successive rise and fall of Galba, Otho and Vitellius until the final accession of Vespasian, first ruler of the Flavian dynasty. The military and political anarchy created by this civil war had serious implications, such as the outbreak of the Batavian rebellion. These events showed that a military power alone could create an emperor.[29] Augustus had established a standing army, where individual soldiers served under the same military governors over an extended period of time. The consequence was that the soldiers in the provinces developed a degree of loyalty to their commanders, which they did not have for the emperor. Thus the Empire was, in a sense, a union of inchoate principalities, which could have disintegrated at any time.[30]

Through his sound fiscal policy, the emperor Vespasian was able to build up a surplus in the treasury, and began construction on the Colosseum. Titus, Vespasian's son and successor, quickly proved his merit, although his short reign was marked by disaster, including the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in Pompeii. He held the opening ceremonies in the still unfinished Colosseum, but died in 81. His brother Domitian succeeded him. Having exceedingly poor relations with the Senate, Domitian was murdered in September 96.

69–96: Flavian dynasty

The Flavians, although a relatively short-lived dynasty, helped restore stability to an empire on its knees. Although all three have been criticised, especially based on their more centralised style of rule, they issued reforms that created a stable enough empire to last well into the 3rd century. However, their background as a military dynasty led to further marginalisation of the Roman Senate, and a conclusive move away from princeps, or first citizen, and toward imperator, or emperor.

69–79: Vespasian

Vespasian was a remarkably successful Roman general who had been given rule over much of the eastern part of the Roman Empire. He had supported the imperial claims of Galba, after whose death Vespasian became a major contender for the throne. Following the suicide of Otho, Vespasian was able to take control of Rome's winter grain supply in Egypt, placing him in a good position to defeat his remaining rival, Vitellius. On 20 December 69, some of Vespasian's partisans were able to occupy Rome. Vitellius was murdered by his own troops and, the next day, Vespasian, then sixty years old, was confirmed as emperor by the Senate.

Although Vespasian was considered an autocrat by the Senate, he mostly continued the weakening of that body begun in the reign of Tiberius. The degree of the Senate's subservience can be seen from the post-dating of his accession to power, by the Senate, to 1 July, when his troops proclaimed him emperor, instead of 21 December, when the Senate confirmed his appointment. Another example was his assumption of the censorship in 73, giving him power over the make up of the Senate. He used that power to expel dissident senators. At the same time, he increased the number of senators from 200 (at that low level because of the actions of Nero and the year of crisis that followed), to 1,000; most of the new senators came not from Rome but from Italy and the urban centres within the western provinces.

Vespasian was able to liberate Rome from the financial burdens placed upon it by Nero's excesses and the civil wars. To do this, he not only increased taxes, but created new forms of taxation. Also, through his power as censor, he was able to carefully examine the fiscal status of every city and province, many paying taxes based upon information and structures more than a century old. Through this sound fiscal policy, he was able to build up a surplus in the treasury and embark on public works projects. It was he who first commissioned the Amphitheatrum Flavium (Colosseum); he also built the Forum of Vespasian, whose centrepiece was the Temple of Peace. In addition, he allotted sizeable subsidies to the arts, and created a chair of rhetoric at Rome.

Vespasian was also an effective emperor for the provinces, having posts all across the empire, both east and west. In the west he gave considerable favouritism to Hispania (the Iberian Peninsula, comprising modern Spain and Portugal) in which he granted Latin Rights to over three hundred towns and cities, promoting a new era of urbanisation throughout the western (formerly barbarian) provinces. Through the additions he made to the Senate he allowed greater influence of the provinces in the Senate, helping to promote unity in the empire. He also extended the borders of the empire, mostly done to help strengthen the frontier defences, one of Vespasian's main goals.

The crisis of 69 had wrought havoc on the army. One of the most marked problems had been the support lent by provincial legions to men who supposedly represented the best will of their province. This was mostly caused by the placement of native auxiliary units in the areas they were recruited in, a practice Vespasian stopped; he mixed auxiliary units with men from other areas of the empire or moved the units away from where they were recruited. Also, to reduce further the chances of another military coup, he broke up the legions and, instead of placing them in singular concentrations, spread them along the border. Perhaps the most important military reform he undertook was the extension of legion recruitment from exclusively Italy to Gaul and Hispania, in line with the Romanisation of those areas.

79–81: Titus

Titus, the eldest son of Vespasian, had been groomed to rule. He had served as an effective general under his father, helping to secure the east and eventually taking over the command of Roman armies in Syria and Iudaea, quelling a significant First Jewish–Roman War at the time. He shared the consulship for several years with his father and received the best tutelage. Although there was some trepidation when he took office because of his known dealings with some of the less respectable elements of Roman society, he quickly proved his merit, even recalling many exiled by his father as a show of good faith.

However, his short reign was marked by disaster: in 79, Mount Vesuvius erupted in Pompeii, and in 80, a fire destroyed much of Rome. His generosity in rebuilding after these tragedies made him very popular. Titus was very proud of his work on the vast amphitheatre begun by his father. He held the opening ceremonies in the still unfinished edifice during the year 80, celebrating with a lavish show that featured 100 gladiators and lasted 100 days. Titus died in 81 at the age of 41 of what is presumed to be illness; it was rumoured that his brother Domitian murdered him in order to become his successor, although these claims have little merit. Whatever the case, he was greatly mourned and missed.

81–96: Domitian

All of the Flavians had rather poor relations with the Senate due to their autocratic rule; however, Domitian was the only one who encountered significant problems. His continuous control as consul and censor throughout his rule—the former his father shared in much the same way as his Julio-Claudian forerunners, the latter presented difficulty even to obtain—were unheard of. In addition, he often appeared in full military regalia as an imperator, an affront to the idea of what the Principate-era emperor's power was based upon: the emperor as the princeps. His reputation in the Senate aside, he kept the people of Rome happy through various measures, including donations to every resident of Rome, wild spectacles in the newly finished Colosseum, and the continuation of the public works projects of his father and brother. He also apparently had the good fiscal sense of his father; although he spent lavishly, his successors came to power with a well-endowed treasury. Domitian repelled the Dacians in his Dacian War; the Dacians had sought to conquer Moesia, south of the Danube in the Roman Balkans.

Toward the end of his reign Domitian became extremely paranoid, which probably had its roots in the treatment he received by his father: although given significant responsibility, he was never trusted with anything important without supervision. This flowered into the severe and perhaps pathological repercussions following the short-lived rebellion in 89 of Lucius Antonius Saturninus, a governor and commander in Germania Superior. Domitian's paranoia led to a large number of arrests, executions, and seizures of property (which might help explain his ability to spend so lavishly). Eventually it reached the point where even his closest advisers and family members lived in fear. This led to his murder in 96, orchestrated by his enemies in the Senate, Stephanus (the steward of the deceased Julia Flavia), members of the Praetorian Guard and the empress Domitia Longina.

96–180: Five Good Emperors

The next century came to be known as the period of the "Five Good Emperors", in which the succession was peaceful and the Empire prosperous. The emperors of this period were Nerva (96–98), Trajan (98–117), Hadrian (117–138), Antoninus Pius (138–161) and Marcus Aurelius (161–180), each one adopted by his predecessor as his successor during the former's lifetime. While their respective choices of successor were based upon the merits of the individual men they selected rather than dynastic, it has been argued that the real reason for the lasting success of the adoptive scheme of succession lay more with the fact that none but the last had a natural heir.

The last two emperors of the "Five Good Emperors" and Commodus are also called Antonines.

96–98: Nerva

After his accession, Nerva set a new tone: he released those imprisoned for treason, banned future prosecutions for treason, restored much confiscated property, and involved the Roman Senate in his rule. He probably did so as a means to remain relatively popular and therefore alive, but this did not completely aid him. Support for Domitian in the army remained strong, and in October 97 the Praetorian Guard laid siege to the Imperial Palace on the Palatine Hill and took Nerva hostage. He was forced to submit to their demands, agreeing to hand over those responsible for Domitian's death and even giving a speech thanking the rebellious Praetorians. Nerva then adopted Trajan, a commander of the armies on the German frontier, as his successor shortly thereafter in order to bolster his own rule. Casperius Aelianus, the Guard Prefect responsible for the mutiny against Nerva, was later executed under Trajan.

98–117: Trajan

Upon his accession to the throne, Trajan prepared and launched a carefully planned military invasion in Dacia, a region north of the lower Danube whose inhabitants the Dacians had long been an opponent to Rome. In 101, Trajan personally crossed the Danube and defeated the armies of the Dacian king Decebalus at the Battle of Tapae. The emperor decided not to press on towards a final conquest as his armies needed reorganisation, but he did impose very hard peace conditions on the Dacians. At Rome, Trajan was received as a hero and he took the name of Dacicus, a title that appears on his coinage of this period.[31] Decebalus complied with the terms for a time, but before long he began inciting revolt. In 105 Trajan once again invaded and after a yearlong invasion ultimately defeated the Dacians by conquering their capital, Sarmizegetusa Regia. King Decebalus, cornered by the Roman cavalry, eventually committed suicide rather than being captured and humiliated in Rome. The conquest of Dacia was a major accomplishment for Trajan, who ordered 123 days of celebration throughout the empire. He also constructed Trajan's Column in the middle of Trajan's Forum in Rome to glorify the victory.

In 112, Trajan was provoked by the decision of Osroes I to put the latter’s own nephew Axidares on the throne of the Kingdom of Armenia. The Arsacid dynasty of Armenia was a branch of the Parthian royal family established in 54. Since then, the two great empires had shared hegemony of Armenia. The encroachment on the traditional Roman sphere of influence by Osroes ended the peace which had lasted for some 50 years.[32]

Trajan first invaded Armenia. He deposed the king and annexed it to the Roman Empire. Then he turned south into Parthian territory in Mesopotamia, taking the cities of Babylon, Seleucia and finally the capital of Ctesiphon in 116, while suppressing the Kitos War, a Jewish uprising across the eastern provinces. He continued southward to the Persian Gulf, whence he took Mesopotamia as a new province of the empire and lamented that he was too old to follow in the steps of Alexander the Great and continue his invasion eastward.

But he did not stop there. In 116, he captured the great city of Susa. He deposed the emperor Osroes I and put his own puppet ruler Parthamaspates on the throne. Not until the reign of Heraclius would the Roman army push so far to the east, and Roman territory never again reached so far eastward. During his rule, the Roman Empire reached its greatest extent; it was quite possible for a Roman to travel from Britain to the Persian Gulf without leaving Roman territory.

117–138: Hadrian

Despite his own excellence as a military administrator, Hadrian's reign was marked more by the defence of the empire's vast territories, rather than major military conflicts. He surrendered Trajan's conquests in Mesopotamia, considering them to be indefensible. There was almost a war with Vologases III of Parthia around 121, but the threat was averted when Hadrian succeeded in negotiating a peace. Hadrian's army crushed the Bar Kokhba revolt, a massive Jewish uprising in Judea (132–135).

Hadrian was the first emperor to extensively tour the provinces, donating money for local construction projects as he went. In Britain, he ordered the construction of a wall, the famous Hadrian's Wall as well as various other such defences in Germania and North Africa. His domestic policy was one of relative peace and prosperity.

138–161: Antoninus Pius

Antoninus Pius's reign was comparatively peaceful; there were several military disturbances throughout the Empire in his time, in Mauretania, Judaea, and amongst the Brigantes in Britain, but none of them are considered serious. The unrest in Britain is believed to have led to the construction of the Antonine Wall from the Firth of Forth to the Firth of Clyde, although it was soon abandoned.

161–180: Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus

Germanic tribes and other people launched many raids along the long north European border, particularly into Gaul and across the Danube; Germans, in turn, may have been under attack from more warlike tribes farther east, driving them into the empire. His campaigns against them are commemorated on the Column of Marcus Aurelius.

In Asia, a revitalised Parthian Empire renewed its assault. Marcus Aurelius sent his co-emperor Lucius Verus to command the legions in the East. Lucius was authoritative enough to command the full loyalty of the troops, but already powerful enough that he had little incentive to overthrow Marcus. The plan succeeded—Verus remained loyal until his death, while on campaign, in 169.

In 175, while on campaign in northern Germany in the Marcomannic Wars, Marcus was forced to contend with a rebellion by Avidius Cassius, a general who had been an officer during the wars against Persia. Cassius proclaimed himself Roman Emperor and took the provinces of Egypt and Syria as his part of the Empire. It is said that Cassius had revolted as he had heard word that Marcus was dead. After three months Cassius was assassinated and Marcus restored the eastern part of the Empire.

In the last years of his life Marcus, a philosopher as well as an emperor, wrote his book of Stoic philosophy known as the Meditations. The book has since been hailed as Marcus' great contribution to philosophy.

When Marcus died in 180 the throne passed to his son Commodus, who had been elevated to the rank of co-emperor in 177. This ended the succession plan of the previous four emperors where the emperor would adopt his successor, although Marcus was the first emperor since Vespasian to have a natural son that could succeed him, which probably was the reason he allowed the throne to pass to Commodus and not adopt a successor from outside his family.

It is possible that an alleged Roman embassy from "Daqin" that arrived in Eastern Han China in 166 via a Roman maritime route into the South China Sea, landing at Jiaozhou (northern Vietnam) and bearing gifts for the Emperor Huan of Han (r. 146–168), was sent by Marcus Aurelius, or his predecessor Antoninus Pius (the confusion stems from the transliteration of their names as "Andun", Chinese: 安敦).[33][34] The embassy was perhaps simply a group of Roman merchants, not official diplomats.[35] Other Roman embassies of the 3rd century supposedly visited China by sailing along the same maritime route.[34] These were preceded by the appearance of Roman glasswares in Chinese tombs, the earliest piece found at Guangzhou (along the coast of the South China Sea) and dating to the 1st century BC.[36] The earliest Roman coins found in China date to the 4th century AD and appear to have come by way of the Silk Road through Central Asia.[37] However, Roman golden medallions from the reign of Antoninus Pius, and possibly his successor Marcus Aurelius, have been discovered at Óc Eo (in southern Vietnam), which was then part of the kingdom of Funan near Chinese-controlled Jiaozhi (northern Vietnam) and the region where Chinese historical texts claim the Romans first landed before venturing further into China to conduct diplomacy.[38][39] Furthermore, in his Geography (c. AD 150), Ptolemy described the location of the Golden Chersonese, now known as the Malay Peninsula, and beyond this a trading port called Kattigara. Ferdinand von Richthofen assumed this as Hanoi, yet the Roman and Mediterranean artefacts found at Óc Eo suggest this location instead.[38][40]

180–193: Commodus and the Year of the Five Emperors

Commodus

The period of the "Five Good Emperors" was brought to an end by the reign of Commodus from 180 to 192. Commodus was the son of Marcus Aurelius, making him the first direct successor in a century, breaking the scheme of adoptive successors that had worked so well. He was co-emperor with his father from 177. When he became sole emperor upon the death of his father in 180, it was at first seen as a hopeful sign by the people of the Roman Empire. Nevertheless, as generous and magnanimous as his father was, Commodus was just the opposite. In The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Edward Gibbon noted that Commodus at first ruled the Empire well. However, after an assassination attempt involving a conspiracy by certain members of his family, Commodus became paranoid and slipped into insanity. The Pax Romana, or "Roman Peace", ended with the reign of Commodus. One could argue that the assassination attempt began the long decline of the Roman Empire. When Commodus' behaviour became increasingly erratic throughout the early 190s, Pertinax is thought to have been implicated in the conspiracy that led to Commodus' assassination on 31 December 192.[citation needed] The plot was carried out by the Praetorian prefect Quintus Aemilius Laetus, Commodus' mistress Marcia, and his chamberlain Eclectus.[41]

Pertinax

After the murder had been carried out, Pertinax, who was serving as urban prefect at this time, was hurried to the Praetorian Camp and proclaimed emperor the following morning.[42] His short reign (86 days) was an uneasy one. He attempted to emulate the restrained practices of Marcus Aurelius, and made an effort to reform the welfare programme for poor children but he faced antagonism from many quarters.[43]

His monetary reform was far-sighted, but would not survive his death. He attempted to impose stricter military discipline upon the pampered Praetorians.[44] In early March he narrowly averted one conspiracy by a group to replace him with the consul Quintus Pompeius Sosius Falco while he was in Ostia inspecting the arrangements for grain shipments.[45] The plot was betrayed; Falco himself was pardoned but several of the officers behind the coup were executed.[46]

On 28 March 193, Pertinax was at his palace when a contingent of some three hundred soldiers of the Praetorian Guard rushed the gates[47] (two hundred according to Cassius Dio).[48] Sources suggest that they had received only half their promised pay.[45] Neither the guards on duty nor the palace officials chose to resist them. Pertinax sent Laetus to meet them, but he chose to side with the insurgents instead and deserted the emperor.[49] Although advised to flee, he then attempted to reason with them, and was almost successful before being struck down by one of the soldiers.[50] The Praetorian Guards auctioned off the imperial position, which senator Didius Julianus won and became the new emperor.[citation needed]

Didius Julianus

Upon his accession, Julianus immediately devalued the Roman currency by decreasing the silver purity of the denarius from 87% to 81.5%.[51] After the initial confusion had subsided, the population did not tamely submit to the dishonour brought upon Rome.[52][53][54] Whenever Julianus appeared in public he was saluted with groans, imprecations, and shouts of "robber and parricide."[55] The mob tried to obstruct his progress to the Capitol, and even threw stones.[56] When news of the public anger in Rome spread across the Empire, the generals Pescennius Niger in Syria, Septimius Severus in Pannonia, and Clodius Albinus in Britain, each having three legions under his command, refused to recognise the authority of Julianus.[57][58] Julianus declared Severus a public enemy because he was the nearest of the three and, therefore, the most dangerous foe.[59][60] Deputies were sent from the Senate to persuade the soldiers to abandon him;[60] a new general was nominated to supersede him, and a centurion dispatched to take his life.[61]

The Praetorian Guard, lacking discipline and sunk in debauchery and sloth, were incapable of offering any effectual resistance.[62] Julianus, now desperate, attempted negotiation and offered to share the empire with his rival.[63][64][65][66] Severus ignored these overtures and pressed forward, all Italy declaring for him as he advanced.[67] At last the Praetorians, having received assurances that they would suffer no punishment – provided they surrendered the actual murderers of Pertinax – seized the ringleaders of the conspiracy and reported what they had done to Silius Messala, the consul, by whom the Senate was summoned and informed of the proceedings.[68] Julianus was killed in the palace by a soldier in the third month of his reign (1 June 193).[69][70] Severus dismissed the Praetorian Guard and executed the soldiers who had killed Pertinax.[71] According to Cassius Dio, who lived in Rome during the period, Julianus's last words were "But what evil have I done? Whom have I killed?"[69] His body was given to his wife and daughter, who buried it in his great-grandfather's tomb by the fifth milestone on the Via Labicana.[72]

193–235: Severan dynasty

Septimius Severus (193–211)

Lucius Septimius Severus was born to a family of Phoenician equestrian rank in the Roman province of Africa proconsularis. He rose through military service to consular rank under the later Antonines. Proclaimed emperor in 193 by his legionaries in Noricum during the political unrest that followed the death of Commodus, he secured sole rule over the empire in 197 after defeating his last rival, Clodius Albinus, at the Battle of Lugdunum. In securing his position as emperor, he founded the Severan dynasty.

Severus fought a successful war against the Parthians and campaigned with success against barbarian incursions in Roman Britain, rebuilding Hadrian's Wall. In Rome, his relations with the Senate were poor, but he was popular with the commoners, as with his soldiers, whose salary he raised. Starting in 197, the influence of his Praetorian prefect Gaius Fulvius Plautianus was a negative influence; the latter was executed in 205. One of Plautianus's successors was the jurist Papinian. Severus continued official persecution of Christians and Jews, as they were the only two groups who would not assimilate their beliefs to the official syncretistic creed. Severus died while campaigning in Britain. He was succeeded by his sons Caracalla and Geta, whom he made his co-Augusti and who reigned under the influence of their mother, Julia Domna.

Caracalla and Geta (198–217)

The eldest son of Severus, Caracalla was born Lucius Septimius Bassianus in Lugdunum, Gaul. "Caracalla" was a nickname referring to the Gallic hooded tunic he habitually wore even when he slept. Before his father's death, Caracalla was proclaimed co-emperor with his father and brother Geta. Conflict between the two culminated in the assassination of the latter. Unlike the much more successful joint reign of Marcus Aurelius and his brother Lucius Verus in the previous century, relations were hostile between the two Severid brothers from childhood. Geta was assassinated in his mother's apartments by order of Caracalla, who thereafter ruled as sole Augustus.

Reigning alone, Caracalla was noted for lavish bribes to the legionaries and unprecedented cruelty, authorising numerous assassinations of perceived enemies and rivals. He campaigned with indifferent success against the Alamanni. The Baths of Caracalla in Rome are the most enduring monument of his rule. His reign was also notable for the Antonine Constitution (Latin: Constitutio Antoniniana), also known as the Edict of Caracalla, which granted Roman citizenship to nearly all freemen throughout the Roman Empire.

He was assassinated while en route to a campaign against the Parthians by the Praetorian Guard.

Interlude: Macrinus and Diadumenian (217–218)

Macrinus was born in 164 at Caesarea. Although coming from a humble background that was not dynastically related to the Severan dynasty, he rose through the imperial household until, under the emperor Caracalla, he was made prefect of the Praetorian Guard. On account of the cruelty and treachery of the emperor, Macrinus became involved in a conspiracy to kill him, and ordered the Praetorian Guard to do so. On 8 April 217, Caracalla was assassinated travelling to Carrhae. Three days later, Macrinus was declared Augustus. Diadumenian was the son of Macrinus, born in 208. He was given the title Caesar in 217, when his father became Augustus, and raised to co-Augustus the following year.

His most significant early decision was to make peace with the Parthian Empire, but many thought that the terms were degrading to the Romans. However, his downfall was his refusal to award the pay and privileges promised to the eastern troops by Caracalla. He also kept those forces wintered in Syria, where they became attracted to the young Elagabalus. After months of mild rebellion by the bulk of the army in Syria, Macrinus took his loyal troops to meet the army of Elagabalus near Antioch. Despite a good fight by the Praetorian Guard, his soldiers were defeated. Macrinus managed to escape to Chalcedon, but his authority was lost: he was betrayed and executed after a short reign of just 14 months. After his father's defeat outside Antioch, Diadumenian tried to escape east to Parthia, but was captured and killed.

Elagabalus (218–222)

Born Varius Avitus Bassianus on 16 May 205, known later as M. Aurelius Antonius, he was appointed at an early age to be priest of the sun god, Elagabalus, represented by a large, dark rock called a baetyl, by which name he is known to historians (his name is sometimes written "Heliogabalus"). He was proclaimed emperor by the troops of Emesa, his hometown, who were instigated to do so by Elagabalus's grandmother, Julia Maesa. She spread a rumour that Elagabalus was the secret son of Caracalla. This revolt spread to the entire Syrian army (which, at the time, was swollen with troops raised by the emperor Caracalla, and not fully loyal to Macrinus), and eventually they were to win the short struggle that followed by defeating Macrinus at a battle just outside Antioch. Elagabalus was then accepted by the Senate, and he began the slow journey to Rome.

His reign in Rome has long been known for outrageousness, although the historical sources are few, and in many cases not to be fully trusted. He is said to have smothered guests at a banquet by flooding the room with rose petals; married his male lover – who was then referred as the 'empress's husband'; and married one of the Vestal Virgins. Some say he was transgender, and one ancient text states that he offered half the empire to the physician who could give him female genitalia.

The running of the Empire during this time was mainly left to his grandmother and mother (Julia Soaemias). Seeing that her grandson's outrageous behaviour could mean the loss of power, Julia Maesa persuaded Elagabalus to accept his cousin Severus Alexander as Caesar (and thus the nominal emperor-to-be). However, Alexander was popular with the troops, who viewed their new emperor with dislike: when Elagabalus, jealous of this popularity, removed the title of Caesar from his nephew, the enraged Praetorian Guard swore to protect him. Elagabalus and his mother were murdered in a Praetorian Guard camp mutiny.

Severus Alexander (222–235)

Severus Alexander was adopted as son and Caesar by his slightly older and very unpopular cousin, the emperor Elagabalus at the urging of the influential and powerful Julia Maesa — who was grandmother of both cousins and who had arranged for the emperor's acclamation by the Third Legion. On March 6, 222, when Alexander was just fourteen, a rumour went around the city troops that Alexander had been killed, triggering a revolt of the guards that had sworn his safety from Elegabalus and his accession as emperor. The eighteen-year-old Emperor Elagabalus and his mother were both taken from the palace, dragged through the streets, murdered and thrown in the river Tiber by the Praetorian Guard, who then proclaimed Severus Alexander as Augustus.

Ruling from the age of fourteen under the influence of his able mother, Julia Avita Mamaea, Alexander restored, to some extent, the moderation that characterised the rule of Septimius Severus. The rising strength of the Sasanian Empire (226–651) heralded perhaps the greatest external challenge that Rome faced in the 3rd century. His prosecution of the war against a German invasion of Gaul led to his overthrow by the troops he was leading, whose regard the twenty-seven-year-old had lost during the campaign.

235–284: Crisis of the Third Century

The situation of the Roman Empire became dire in AD 235, when the emperor Severus Alexander was murdered by his own troops. Many Roman legions had been defeated during a campaign against Germanic peoples raiding across the borders, while the emperor was focused primarily on the dangers from the Sassanid Persian Empire. Leading his troops personally, Alexander resorted to diplomacy and the paying of tribute in an attempt to pacify the Germanic chieftains quickly. According to Herodian this cost him the respect of his troops, who may have felt they should be punishing the tribes who were intruding on Rome's territory.[73]

In the years following the emperor's death, generals of the Roman army fought each other for control of the Empire and neglected their duties in preventing invasions. Provincials became victims of frequent raids by foreign tribes, such as the Carpians, Goths, Vandals, and Alamanni, along the Rhine and Danube Rivers in the western part of the empire, as well as attacks from Sassanids in the eastern part of the Empire. Additionally, in 251, the Plague of Cyprian (possibly smallpox) broke out, causing large-scale mortality which may have seriously affected the ability of the Empire to defend itself.

By 258, the Roman Empire broke up into three competing states. The Roman provinces of Gaul, Britain and Hispania broke off to form the Gallic Empire and, two years later in 260, the eastern provinces of Syria, Palestine and Aegyptus became independent as the Palmyrene Empire, leaving the remaining Italian-centred Roman Empire-proper in the middle.

An invasion by a vast host of Goths was beaten back at the Battle of Naissus in 269. This victory was significant as the turning point of the crisis, when a series of tough, energetic soldier-emperors took power. Victories by the emperor Claudius Gothicus over the next two years drove back the Alamanni and recovered Hispania from the Gallic Empire. When Claudius died in 270 of the plague, Aurelian, who had commanded the cavalry at Naissus, succeeded him as the emperor and continued the restoration of the Empire.

Aurelian reigned (270–275) through the worst of the crisis, defeating the Vandals, the Visigoths, the Palmyrenes, the Persians, and then the remainder of the Gallic Empire. By late 274, the Roman Empire was reunited into a single entity, and the frontier troops were back in place. More than a century would pass before Rome again lost military ascendancy over its external enemies. However, dozens of formerly thriving cities, especially in the western empire, had been ruined, their populations dispersed and, with the breakdown of the economic system, could not be rebuilt. Major cities and towns, even Rome itself, had not needed fortifications for many centuries; many then surrounded themselves with thick walls.

Finally, although Aurelian had played a significant role in restoring the Empire's borders from external threat, more fundamental problems remained. In particular, the right of succession had never been clearly defined in the Roman Empire, leading to continuous civil wars as competing factions in the military, Senate and other parties put forward their favoured candidate for emperor. Another issue was the sheer size of the Empire, which made it difficult for a single autocratic ruler to effectively manage multiple threats at the same time. These continuing problems would be radically addressed by Diocletian, allowing the Empire to continue to survive in the West for over a century and in the East for over a millennium.

Late Roman Empire

As a matter of historical convention, the late Roman Empire emerged from the Principate (the early Roman Empire), with the accession of Diocletian in 284, following the Third Century Crisis of AD 235–284.[74][11] The end of the late Empire is usually marked in the west with the collapse of the western empire in AD 476, while in the east its end is disputed, as either occurring at the close of the reign of Justinian I (AD 565)[75] or of Heraclius (AD 641).[76] The subsequent period of centuries of the Roman Empire's history is conventionally labelled the "Byzantine Empire", with the reign of Heraclius beginning the Middle Byzantine period, which lasted until the Fourth Crusade.

284–301: Diocletian and the Tetrarchy

The transition to divided western and eastern halves of the empire was gradual. In July 285, Diocletian defeated rival emperor Carinus and briefly became sole emperor of the Roman Empire. Diocletian's reign stabilised the empire and marked the end of the Crisis of the Third Century. Diocletian appointed a co-emperor in 286 and delegated further with two junior-emperors.

Diocletian secured the empire's borders and purged it of all threats to his power. He defeated the Sarmatians and Carpi during several campaigns between 285 and 299, the Alamanni in 288, and usurpers in Egypt between 297 and 298. Galerius, aided by Diocletian, campaigned successfully against Sassanid Persia, the empire's traditional enemy. In 299, he sacked their capital, Ctesiphon. Diocletian led the subsequent negotiations and achieved a lasting and favourable peace. Diocletian separated and enlarged the empire's civil and military services and reorganised the empire's provincial divisions, establishing the largest and most bureaucratic government in the history of the empire. He established new administrative centres in Nicomedia, Mediolanum, Antioch, and Trier, closer to the empire's frontiers than the traditional capital at Rome had been. Building on third-century trends towards absolutism, he styled himself an autocrat, elevating himself above the empire's masses with imposing forms of court ceremonies and architecture. Bureaucratic and military growth, constant campaigning, and construction projects increased the state's expenditures and necessitated a comprehensive tax reform. From at least 297 on, imperial taxation was standardised, made more equitable, and levied at generally higher rates.

Diocletian saw that the vast Roman Empire was ungovernable by a single emperor in the face of internal pressures and military threats on two fronts. He therefore split the Empire in half along a northwest axis just east of Italy, and created two equal emperors to rule under the title of augustus. Diocletian himself was the augustus of the eastern half, and he made his long-time friend Maximian augustus of the western half. In doing so, he effectively created what would become the western empire and the eastern empire.

On 1 March 293, authority was further divided. Each augustus took a junior emperor called a caesar to aid him in administrative matters, and to provide a line of succession. Galerius became caesar for Diocletian and Constantius Chlorus caesar for Maximian. This constituted what is called the Tetrarchy by modern scholars, as each emperor would rule over a quarter-division of the empire. After the empire had been plagued by bloody disputes about the supreme authority, this finally formalised a peaceful succession of the emperor: in each half a caesar would rise up to replace the augustus and select a new caesar. On May 1, 305, Diocletian and Maximian abdicated in favour of their caesares. Galerius named the two new caesares: his nephew Maximinus Daia for himself, and Valerius Severus for Constantius. The arrangement worked well under Diocletian and Maximian and shortly thereafter. The internal tensions within the Roman government were less acute than they had been. In The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Edward Gibbon notes that this arrangement worked well because of the affinity the four rulers had for each other. Gibbon says that this arrangement has been compared to a "chorus of music". With the retirement of Diocletian and Maximian, this harmony disappeared.

After an initial period of tolerance, Diocletian, who was a fervent pagan and was worried about the ever-increasing numbers of Christians in the Empire, persecuted them with zeal unknown since the time of Nero; this was to be one of the greatest persecutions the Christians endured in history. Not all of Diocletian's plans were successful: the Edict on Maximum Prices (301), his attempt to curb inflation via price controls, was counterproductive and quickly ignored. Although effective while he ruled, Diocletian's tetrarchic system collapsed after his abdication under the competing dynastic claims of Maxentius and Constantine, sons of Maximian and Constantius respectively. The Diocletianic Persecution (303–11), the empire's last, largest, and bloodiest official persecution of Christianity, did not destroy the empire's Christian community; indeed, after 324 Christianity became the empire's preferred religion under its first Christian emperor, Constantine.

In spite of his failures, Diocletian's reforms fundamentally changed the structure of Roman imperial government and helped stabilise the empire economically and militarily, enabling the empire to remain essentially intact for another hundred years despite being near the brink of collapse in Diocletian's youth. Weakened by illness, Diocletian left the imperial office on 1 May 305, and became the first Roman emperor to voluntarily abdicate the position (John VI retired to a monastery in the 14th century). He lived out his retirement in his palace on the Dalmatian coast, tending to his vegetable gardens. His palace eventually became the core of the modern-day city of Split.

The peaceful Tetrarchy would effectively collapse with the death of Constantius Chlorus on July 25, 306. Constantius's troops in Eboracum immediately proclaimed his son Constantine the Great as augustus. In August 306, Galerius promoted Severus to the position of augustus. A revolt in Rome supported another claimant to the same title: Maxentius, son of Maximian, who was proclaimed augustus on October 28, 306. His election was supported by the Praetorian Guard and the Roman Senate. This left the Empire with five rulers: four augusti (Galerius, Constantine, Severus and Maxentius) and one caesar (Maximinus).

The year 307 saw the return of Maximian to the rank of augustus alongside his son Maxentius, creating a total of six rulers of the Empire. Galerius and Severus campaigned against them in Italy. Severus was killed under command of Maxentius on September 16, 307. The two augusti of Italy also managed to ally themselves with Constantine by having Constantine marry Fausta, the daughter of Maximian and sister of Maxentius. At the end of 307, the Empire had four augusti (Maximian, Galerius, Constantine and Maxentius) and a sole caesar.

In 311, Galerius's Edict of Serdica officially put an end to the persecution of Christians, though the persecution continued in the territory of Maximinius Daia until his death in 313. Constantine and his co-augustus Licinius legalised Christianity definitively in 313 in the so-called Edict of Milan. In 317, Constantine and Licinius elevated three of the grandchildren of Constantius to caesar: Constantine's eldest sons Crispus and Constantine II, and his nephew, Licinius's son Licinius II. Constantine defeated his brother-in-law in 324 and executed both him and his son. This unified the empire under his control as sole augustus, with only his young sons as co-emperors; he raised his son Constantius II to caesar in 324.

324–363: Constantinian dynasty

Having executed his eldest son and caesar Crispus in 326, Constantine also elevated his son Constans to caesar in 333, as well as appointing his relatives Dalmatius and Hannibalianus to caesar and King of Kings respectively. Constantine would rule until his death on 22 May 337. On their father's death, an interregnum followed during which Constantine II, Constantius II, and Constans eliminated most of the Constantinian dynasty in a struggle for power that ended with the elevation of the three brothers as co-augusti in September 337. The empire was parted again among his three surviving sons.

Constantine II was killed in conflict with his youngest brother in 340. Constans was himself killed in conflict with the rebel augustus Magnentius on 18 January 350. Magnentius was at first opposed in the city of Rome by self-proclaimed augustus Nepotianus, a paternal first cousin of Constans. Nepotianus was killed alongside his mother Eutropia. His other first cousin Constantia convinced Vetranio to proclaim himself caesar in opposition to Magnentius. Vetranio served a brief term from 1 March to 25 December 350. He was then forced to abdicate by the legitimate augustus Constantius. The usurper Magnentius would continue to rule the western Roman Empire until 353 while in conflict with Constantius. His eventual defeat and suicide left Constantius as sole emperor until the nomination of his cousin Constantius Gallus as his caesar and co-emperor.

Constantius's rule would, however, be opposed again in 360. After his execution of Constantius Gallus, the augustus Constantius had named his paternal half-cousin and brother-in-law Julian as his caesar in 355, sending him to rule from Trier. During the following five years, Julian had a series of victories against invading Germanic tribes, including the Alamanni. This allowed him to secure the Rhine frontier. His victorious Gallic troops thus ceased campaigning. Constantius sent orders for the troops to be transferred to the east as reinforcements for his own currently unsuccessful campaign against Shapur II of Persia. This order led the Gallic troops to an insurrection. They acclaimed, invested, and crowned their commanding officer Julian as augustus after the decisive Battle of Strasbourg, a distinction he had previously been offered but declined. Both augusti readied their troops for another Roman civil war, but the timely demise of Constantius on 3 November 361 and his deathbed recognition of Julian as co-augustus prevented the Roman civil war of 350–353 from reaching Constantinople.

Julian would serve as the sole emperor for two years. He had been raised by the Gothic slave Mardonius, a great admirer of ancient Greek philosophy and literature. Julian had received his baptism as a Christian years before, but no longer considered himself one. His reign would see the ending of restrictions and violence against paganism introduced by his uncle and father-in-law Constantine I and his cousins and brothers-in-law Constantine II, Constans and Constantius II. He instead placed similar restrictions on Christianity, and some unofficial violence against Christians occurred. His edict of toleration in 362 ordered the reopening of pagan temples and the reinstitution of alienated temple properties, and, more problematically for the Christian Church, the recalling of previously exiled Christian bishops. Returning orthodox and Arian bishops resumed their conflicts, thus further weakening the Church as a whole.

Julian himself was not a traditional pagan. His personal beliefs were largely influenced by Neoplatonism and Theurgy; he reputedly believed he was the reincarnation of Alexander the Great. He produced works of philosophy arguing his beliefs. His brief renaissance of paganism would, however, end with his death. Julian eventually resumed the war against Shapur II of Persia. He received a mortal wound in battle and died on June 26, 363.

According to Gibbon in The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, upon being mortally wounded by a dart, he was carried back to his camp. He gave a farewell speech, in which he refused to name a successor. He then proceeded to debate the philosophical nature of the soul with his generals. He then requested water and, shortly after drinking it, died. He was considered a hero by pagan sources of his time and a villain by Christian ones. Gibbon wrote quite favourably about Julian. Contemporary historians have treated him as a controversial figure.

Julian died childless and with no designated successor. The officers of his army elected the rather obscure officer Jovian emperor. He is remembered for signing an unfavourable peace treaty with the Sasanian Empire, ceding territories won from the Persians, dating back to Trajan. He restored the privileges of Christianity. He is considered a Christian himself, though little is known of his beliefs. Jovian himself died on 17 February 364.

364–392: Valentinianic dynasty

The role of choosing a new augustus fell again to army officers. On 28 February 364, Pannonian officer Valentinian I was elected augustus in Nicaea, Bithynia. The army had been left leaderless twice in less than a year, and the officers demanded Valentinian choose a co-ruler. On 28 March, Valentinian chose his own younger brother Valens and the two new augusti parted the empire in the pattern established by Diocletian: Valentinian would administer the western provinces, while Valens took control over the eastern empire.

The election of Valens was soon disputed. Procopius, a Cilician maternal cousin of Julian, had been considered a likely heir to his cousin but was never designated as such. He had been in hiding since the election of Jovian. In 365, while Valentinian was at Paris and then at Rheims to direct the operations of his generals against the Alamanni, Procopius managed to bribe two legions assigned to Constantinople and take control of Constantinople. He was acclaimed augustus on September 28 and soon extended his control to both Thrace and Bithynia. War between the rival emperors continued until Procopius was defeated. Valens had him executed on 27 May 366.

On 4 August 367, the eight-year-old Gratian was proclaimed as a third augustus by his father Valentinian, who had fallen ill, a nominal co-ruler and means to secure succession.

In April 375, Valentinian I led his army in a campaign against the Quadi, a Germanic tribe which had invaded his native region of Pannonia. According to Ammianus Marcellinus, during an audience with an embassy from the Quadi at Brigetio on the Danube, Valentinian suffered a burst blood vessel in his brain while angrily yelling at the people gathered,[77] resulting in his death on 17 November 375. Gratian was then a 16-year-old and arguably ready to act as emperor, but the troops in Pannonia proclaimed his infant half-brother emperor under the title Valentinian II. Valens and Gratian acquiesced in their choice. While the senior augustus administered the eastern empire, Gratian governed the praetorian prefecture of Gaul. The praetorian prefecture of Italy, Illyricum, and Africa were officially administrated by infant brother and Gratian's stepmother Justina. However the division was merely nominal, actual authority in the west still rested with Gratian, and with Valens as the senior emperor.

Meanwhile, the Eastern Roman Empire faced its own problems with Germanic tribes. The Thervingi, an East Germanic tribe, fled their former lands following an invasion by the Huns. Their leaders Alavivus and Fritigern led them to seek refuge in the Eastern Roman Empire. Valens allowed them to settle as foederati on the southern bank of the Danube in 376. However, the newcomers faced problems from allegedly corrupted provincial commanders and a series of hardships. Their dissatisfaction led them to revolt against their Roman hosts.

Conflicts continued for the following two years. Valens led a campaign against them in 378. Gratian provided his uncle with reinforcements from the western Roman army. However, this campaign proved disastrous for the Romans. The two armies approached each other near Adrianople. Valens was apparently overconfident of the numerical superiority of his own forces over the Goths. Some of his officers advised caution and to await the arrival of Gratian, others urged an immediate attack and eventually prevailed over Valens, who, eager to have all of the glory for himself, rushed into battle. On 9 August 378, the Battle of Adrianople resulted in the crushing defeat of the Romans and the death of Valens. Contemporary historian Ammianus Marcellinus estimated that two-thirds of the Roman army were lost in the battle.

The battle had far-reaching consequences. Veteran soldiers and valuable administrators were among the heavy casualties. There were few available replacements at the time, leaving the Empire with the problem of finding suitable leadership. The Roman army also started to face recruiting problems. In the following century much of the Roman army would consist of Germanic mercenaries.

The death of Valens left Gratian and Valentinian II as the sole augusti. Gratian was now effectively responsible for the whole empire. He sought a replacement augustus for the Eastern Roman Empire. His choice was Theodosius I, son of formerly distinguished magister equitum Count Theodosius. The elder Theodosius had been executed in early 375 for unclear reasons. The younger Theodosius was named Gratian and Valentinian's junior co-augustus on January 19, 379, at Sirmium.

Gratian governed the western Roman Empire with energy and success for some years, but he gradually sank into indolence. He is considered to have become a figurehead while Frankish general Merobaudes and bishop Ambrose of Milan jointly acted as the power behind the throne. Gratian lost favour with factions of the Roman Senate by prohibiting traditional paganism at Rome and relinquishing his title of Pontifex maximus. The senior augustus also became unpopular with his own Roman troops because of his close association with so-called barbarians. He reportedly recruited Alans to his personal service and adopted the guise of a Scythian warrior for public appearances.

Meanwhile, Gratian, Valentinian II and Theodosius were joined by a fourth augustus. Theodosius elevated his oldest son Arcadius to augustus in January 383, in an obvious attempt to secure succession. The boy was still only five or six years old and held no actual authority. Nevertheless, he was recognised as a co-emperor by all three augusti.

The increasing unpopularity of Gratian would cause the four augusti problems later that same year. Magnus Maximus, a general from Hispania, stationed in Roman Britain, was proclaimed augustus by his troops in 383 and, rebelling against Gratian, he invaded Gaul. Gratian fled from Lutetia (Paris) to Lugdunum (Lyon), where he was assassinated on 25 August 383, at the age of 25.

Maximus was a firm believer of the Nicene Creed and introduced state persecution on charges of heresy, which brought him into conflict with Pope Siricius, who argued that the augustus had no authority over church matters. But he was an emperor with popular support, as is attested in Romano-British tradition, where he gained a place in the Mabinogion, compiled about a thousand years after his death.

Following Gratian's death, Maximus had to deal with Valentinian II, at the time only twelve years old, as the senior augustus. During the first few years, the Alps would serve as the borders between the respective territories of the two rival western Roman emperors. Maximus controlled the praetorian prefecture of Gaul. He assumed the government at Augusta Treverorum (Trier), the prefecture's capital.

Maximus soon entered negotiations with Valentinian II and Theodosius, attempting to gain their official recognition. By 384 negotiations were unfruitful and Maximus tried to press the matter by settling succession as only a legitimate emperor could do: proclaiming his own infant son Flavius Victor an augustus. The end of the year found the Empire having five augusti (Valentinian II, Theodosius I, Arcadius, Magnus Maximus and Flavius Victor) with relations between them yet to be determined. Theodosius was left a widower in 385, following the sudden death of Aelia Flaccilla, his augusta and the mother of Arcadius and Honorius.

In 386, Maximus and Victor finally received official recognition by Theodosius but not by Valentinian. In 387, Maximus apparently decided to rid himself of his Italian rival. He crossed the Alps into the valley of the Po and threatened Milan. Theodosius was remarried to the sister of Valentinian II, Galla, after their mother Justina fled with the young emperor to Theodosius's territory to escape Magnus Maximus's invasion of Italy. The marriage secured closer relations between the two augusti. Theodosius indeed campaigned west in 388 and was victorious against Maximus. Maximus himself was captured and executed in Aquileia on 28 July 388. The magister militum Arbogast was sent to Trier with orders to also kill Flavius Victor. Theodosius restored Valentinian to power and through his influence had him converted to orthodox catholic Christianity. Theodosius continued supporting Valentinian and protecting him from a variety of usurpations.

379–457: Valentinianic–Theodosian dynasty

In 392 Valentinian II died mysteriously in Vienne. Arbogast, who may have killed him, arranged for the appointment of Eugenius as emperor. However, the eastern emperor Theodosius refused to recognise Eugenius as emperor and invaded the West, defeating and killing Arbogast and Eugenius at the Battle of the Frigidus. He thus reunited the entire Roman Empire under his rule, the last emperor who had practical power over the whole empire. On his death in February 395, the two halves of the Empire went to his two sons Arcadius and Honorius.

Arcadius became ruler in the East, with his capital in Constantinople, and Honorius became ruler in the West, with his capital in Milan and later Ravenna. The Roman state would continue to have two different emperors with different seats of power throughout the 5th century, though the eastern Romans considered themselves to be the only ones who were fully Roman. Latin was used in official writings as much as, if not more than, Greek and the two halves were nominally, culturally and historically, if not politically, the same state. Arcadius died in 408, having already elevated his infant son Theodosius II to augustus in 402. Theodosius II reigned for more than forty years.

Theodosius had two sons and a daughter, Pulcheria, from his first wife, Aelia Flacilla. His daughter and wife had died in 385. By his second wife, Galla, the daughter of Valentinian the Great, he had a daughter, Galla Placidia; his son Gratian did not survive infancy. Galla Placidia, having grown up at Constantinople, married first Athaulf, king of the Visigoths, and then the future Constantius III. Both her husbands died not long after the marriages, and Constantius III, who succeeded Honorius as augustus, reigned for less than a year. Galla Placidia and Constantius had two children: the future Valentinian III, who became augustus in the western empire, and Justa Grata Honoria.

On the death of Honorius, the official Joannes seized power in Italy and Thedosius II appointed Valentinian III his caesar and dispatched him to the western empire with an army, which deposed Joannes and whose commander elevated Valentinian to augustus on the first anniversary of his appointment as caesar. His mother the augusta Galla Placidia was regent during his youth. Valentinian III married Theodosius II's daughter Licinia Eudoxia and reigned for three decades until his murder by the rebel augustus Petronius Maximus and his caesar Palladius, who forced Valentinian's wife Licinia and daughter Placidia to marry them.

On the death of Theodosius II, the military officer Marcian was acclaimed Valentinian III's co-augustus and married the late emperor's elder sister, the augusta Pulcheria. Marcian was the last of the Theodosians to rule in the east, and only connected to them by marriage to the augusta. When Pulcheria died in 453 and Marcian died in 457, ending the Theodosian line, the court at Constantinople selected the general Leo I as his successor as augustus, beginning the reign of the Leonid dynasty.

457–518: Leonid dynasty

The Leonid dynasty established by Leo I was continued by his daughters by the augusta Verina: Ariadne and Leontia. Ariadne married Zeno and their son together, Leo II, was elevated to augustus on the death of his grandfather (or shortly beforehand) in 474. Leo II, still a child, also died that year, but not before crowning his own father Zeno his co-emperor. Zeno, who was then sole augustus, faced numerous rebellions because of his tenuous claim to the throne, including a usurpation by Basiliscus, Leo I's brother-in-law, that briefly ousted Zeno from Constantinople. Other claimants were descended from Marcia Euphemia, the daughter of the emperor Marcian from his first marriage, before becoming emperor. Marcia Euphemia married Anthemius, who became augustus in the west in 467, and had several sons: Anthemiolus was killed fighting the Goths in the west, but his brothers Romulus, Procopius Anthemius, and Marcianus, who married Leontia, sought to overthrow Zeno, as did the generals Illus and Leontius, though each failed to dislodge the emperor. A relative of Leo I's wife Verina whose name is lost was married to Julius, the future emperor, who took the name Nepos, 'nephew', from his wife's relationship with the imperial dynasty.

When Zeno died in 491, his widow Ariadne remarried, wedding a silentiarius, Anastasius Dicorus, who was then acclaimed and crowned emperor. Anastasius built the Anastasian Wall as an outer defensive works for the fortification Walls of Constantinople.

After 395, the emperors in the western empire were usually figureheads, while the actual rulers were military strongmen who took the title of magister militum, patrician or both—Stilicho from 395 to 408, Constantius from about 411 to 421, Aëtius from 433 to 454 and Ricimer from about 457 to 472.

The year 476 is generally accepted as the formal end of the Western Roman Empire. That year, Orestes, having stolen power from the emperor Julius Nepos the year before, refused the request of Germanic mercenaries in his service for lands in Italy. The dissatisfied mercenaries, including the Heruli, revolted. The revolt was led by the Germanic chieftain Odoacer. Odoacer and his men captured and executed Orestes; weeks later they captured Ravenna and deposed Orestes' usurper son, Romulus Augustus. This event has been traditionally considered the fall of the Roman Empire in the west. Odoacer quickly conquered the remaining provinces of Italy.

Odoacer returned the western imperial regalia to the eastern emperor, Zeno. Zeno soon received two deputations. One was from Odoacer requesting that his control of Italy be formally recognised by the empire, in which case he would in turn acknowledge Zeno's supremacy. The other deputation was from Julius Nepos, requesting support to regain the throne. Zeno granted Odoacer the title patrician. Zeno told Odoacer and the Roman Senate to take Nepos back, but Nepos never returned from Dalmatia, even though Odoacer issued coins in his name. Upon Nepos's death in 480, Zeno claimed Dalmatia for the East; J. B. Bury considers this the real end of the Western Roman Empire. Odoacer attacked Dalmatia, and the ensuing war ended with Theodoric the Great, King of the Ostrogoths, conquering Italy under Zeno's authority and forming the Ostrogothic Kingdom, with its capital at Ravenna.

518–602: Justinian dynasty

When Anastasius himself died, the court at Constantinople ignored potential claimants from the Valentinianic–Theodosian dynasty and elevated instead a senior officer of the imperial guard, Justin I, as augustus.

Map gallery

Empire

Orient

See also

History of Rome
Timeline of Roman history
Legacy of the Roman Empire
Succession of the Roman Empire
History of the Byzantine Empire

Notes

^ Other ways of referring to the "Roman Empire" among the Romans and Greeks themselves included Res publica Romana or Imperium Romanorum (also in Greek: Βασιλεία τῶν Ῥωμαίων – Basileíā tôn Rhōmaíōn – ["Dominion (Literally 'kingdom') of the Romans"]) and Romania. Res publica means Roman "commonwealth"  and can refer to both the Republican and the Imperial eras. Imperium Romanum (or Romanorum) refers to the territorial extent of Roman authority. Populus Romanus ("the Roman people") was/is often used to indicate the Roman state in matters involving other nations. The term Romania, initially a colloquial term for the empire's territory as well as a collective name for its inhabitants, appears in Greek and Latin sources from the 4th century onward and was eventually carried over to the Byzantine Empire (see R. L. Wolff, "Romania: The Latin Empire of Constantinople" in Speculum 23 (1948), pp. 1–34 and especially pp. 2–3).

References

Abbott, Frank Frost (1901). A History and Description of Roman Political Institutions. Boston: Ginn. OCLC 1069567291.
Cassius Dio (1925). Roman History. Loeb classical library, 176. Vol. VIII: Books 61–70. Translated by Cary, Earnest; Foster, Herbert B. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. doi:10.4159/DLCL.dio_cassius-roman_history.1914. ISBN 978-0674991958. OCLC 902696997. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)
Cassius Dio (1927). Roman History. Loeb classical library, 177. Vol. IX: Books 71–80. Translated by Cary, Earnest; Foster, Herbert B. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. doi:10.4159/DLCL.dio_cassius-roman_history.1914. ISBN 978-0674991965. OCLC 899735677. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)
Magie, David (1921). Historia Augusta, Volume I: Hadrian. Aelius. Antoninus Pius. Marcus Aurelius. L. Verus. Avidius Cassius. Commodus. Pertinax. Didius Julianus. Septimius Severus. Pescennius Niger. Clodius Albinus. Loeb classical library, 139. Vol. I. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0674991545. OCLC 899735637. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)
Magie, David (1924). Historia Augusta, Volume II: Caracalla. Geta. Opellius Macrinus. Diadumenianus. Elagabalus. Severus Alexander. The Two Maximini. The Three Gordians. Maximus and Balbinus. Loeb classical library, 140. Vol. II. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0674991552. OCLC 899735638. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)

^ Bennett, J. Trajan: Optimus Princeps. 1997. Fig. 1. Regions east of the Euphrates river were held only in the years 116–117.

^ a b c Taagepera, Rein (1979). "Size and Duration of Empires: Growth-Decline Curves, 600 BC to AD 600". Social Science History. 3 (3/4). Duke University Press: 118. doi:10.2307/1170959. JSTOR 1170959.

^ Turchin, Peter; Adams, Jonathan M.; Hall, Thomas D (December 2006). "East-West Orientation of Historical Empires". Journal of World-Systems Research. 12 (2): 219–229. doi:10.5195/JWSR.2006.369. ISSN 1076-156X.

^ John D. Durand, Historical Estimates of World Population: An Evaluation, 1977, pp. 253–296.

^ Christopher Kelly, The Roman Empire: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford University Press, 2006), pp. 4ff.

^ Nicolet, Claude (1991) [1988, in French]. Space, Geography, and Politics in the Early Roman Empire. University of Michigan Press. pp. 1, 15.

^ T. Corey Brennan, The Praetorship in the Roman Republic (Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 605 et passim.

^ Clifford Ando, "From Republic to Empire," in The Oxford Handbook of Social Relations in the Roman World (Oxford University Press, pp. 39–40.

^ Dio Cassius 72.36.4, Loeb edition translated E. Cary.

^ Brown, P., The World of Late Antiquity, London 1971, p. 22.

^ a b "Oxford Centre for Late Antiquity: The Late Roman Empire". University of Oxford. 2012. Archived from the original on 29 May 2018. Retrieved 8 December 2018. The late Roman period (which we are defining as, roughly, AD 250–450)...

^ Adrian Goldsworth, How Rome Fell: Death of a Superpower (Yale University Press, 2009), pp. 405–415.

^ Potter, David. The Roman Empire at Bay. 296–98.

^ Chester G. Starr, A History of the Ancient World, Second Edition. Oxford University Press, 1974. pp. 670–678.

^ Isaac Asimov. Asimov's Chronology of the World. Harper Collins, 1989. p. 110.

^ Eck, Werner; translated by Deborah Lucas Schneider; new material by Sarolta A. Takács. (2003) The Age of Augustus. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. p. 12.

^ Paul K. Davis, 100 Decisive Battles from Ancient Times to the Present: The World's Major Battles and How They Shaped History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 63.

^ Eck, Werner; translated by Deborah Lucas Schneider; new material by Sarolta A. Takács. (2003) The Age of Augustus. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. p. 40.

^ Birley, E.B. (1928). "A Note on the Title 'Gemina'". Journal of Roman Studies. 18: 56–60. doi:10.2307/296044. JSTOR 296044. S2CID 162265493.

^ Abbott 1901, p. 272.

^ a b Abbott 1901, p. 273.

^ Pliny the Elder, Natural Histories XXVIII.5.23.

^ Abbott 1901, p. 293.

^ Goldsworthy, In the Name of Rome, p. 269.

^ Luttwak, The Grand Strategy of the Roman Empire, p. 38.

^ Scramuzza, Vincent (1940). The Emperor Claudius Cambridge: Harvard University Press. p. 29.

^ Dio-Loeb 1925, 29 (p. 191).

^ Cassius Dio; Thayer, Bill. "Cassius Dio – Epitome of Book 63" (retyped, unproofread transcription of Dio-Loeb-1925). 29 (p. 191).

^ Abbott 1901, p. 298.

^ Abbott 1901, p. 296.

^ "De Imperatoribus Romanis". Retrieved 2007-11-08. Although the Dacians had been defeated, the emperor postponed the final siege for the conquering of Sarmizegetuza because his armies needed reorganisation. Trajan imposed on the Dacians very hard peace conditions: Decebalus had to renounce claim to some regions of his kingdom, including Banat, Tara Hategului, Oltenia, and Muntenia in the area south-west of Transylvania. He had also to surrender all the Roman deserters and all his war machines. At Rome, Trajan was received as a winner and he took the name of Dacicus, a title that appears on his coinage of this period. At the beginning of the year AD 103, there were minted coins with the inscription: IMP NERVA TRAIANVS AVG GER DACICVS.

^ Statius Silvae 5.1; Dio Cassius 68.17.1.; Arrian Parthica frs 37/40.

^ Yü, Ying-shih. (1986). "Han Foreign Relations," in Denis Twitchett and Michael Loewe (eds), The Cambridge History of China: Volume I: the Ch'in and Han Empires, 221 B.C. – A.D. 220, 377–462, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 460–461, ISBN 978-0-521-24327-8.

^ a b Paul Halsall (2000) [1998]. Jerome S. Arkenberg (ed.). "East Asian History Sourcebook: Chinese Accounts of Rome, Byzantium and the Middle East, c. 91 B.C.E. – 1643 C.E." Fordham University. Retrieved 2016-09-17.

^ de Crespigny, Rafe (2007), A Biographical Dictionary of Later Han to the Three Kingdoms (AD 23–220), Leiden: Koninklijke Brill, p. 600, ISBN 978-90-04-15605-0.

^ An, Jiayao. (2002), "When Glass Was Treasured in China," in Annette L. Juliano and Judith A. Lerner (eds), Silk Road Studies VII: Nomads, Traders, and Holy Men Along China's Silk Road, 79–94, Turnhout: Brepols Publishers, ISBN 2503521789, p. 83.

^ Hansen, Valerie (2012), The Silk Road: A New History, Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 97, ISBN 978-0-19-993921-3.

^ a b Gary K. Young (2001), Rome's Eastern Trade: International Commerce and Imperial Policy, 31 BC – AD 305, London & New York: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-24219-3, p. 29.

^ For further information on the Kingdom of Funan and discoveries at Oc Eo, see Milton Osborne (2006), The Mekong: Turbulent Past, Uncertain Future, Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin, revised edition, first published in 2000, ISBN 1-74114-893-6, pp. 24–25.

^ Ferdinand von Richthofen, China, Berlin, 1877, Vol.I, pp. 504–510; cited in Richard Hennig, Terrae incognitae : eine Zusammenstellung und kritische Bewertung der wichtigsten vorcolumbischen Entdeckungsreisen an Hand der daruber vorliegenden Originalberichte, Band I, Altertum bis Ptolemäus, Leiden, Brill, 1944, pp. 387, 410–411; cited in Zürcher (2002), pp. 30–31.

^ Bowman, pg. 1.[full citation needed]

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Pertinax, 4:5.

^ Gibbon, Ch. 4.

^ Zosimus, "Historia Nova", English translation at The Tertullian Project. 1:8.

^ a b Dio, 74:8.

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Pertinax, 10:4.

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Pertinax, 11:1.

^ Dio, 74:9.

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Pertinax, 11:7.

^ Dio, 74:10.

^ Tulane University "Roman Currency of the Principate" Archived 2008-11-01 at the Wayback Machine

^ Dio-Loeb 1927, lxxiv, 13.2–5.

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Didius Julianus, 4.2–7.

^ Herodian, Roman History, ii.7.3.

^ Dio-Loeb 1927, lxxiv, 13.3.

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Didius Julianus, 4.2, 4.4.

^ Dio-Loeb 1927, lxxiv, 14.3–4.

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Didius Julianus, 5.1–2.

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Didius Julianus, 5.3.

^ a b Historia Augusta 1921, Septimius Severus, 5.5.

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Didius Julianus, 5.4–8.

^ Dio-Loeb 1927, lxxiv, 16.3.

^ Dio-Loeb 1927, lxxiv, 17.2.

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Didius Julianus, 6.9.

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Septimius Severus, 5.7.

^ Herodian, ii.12.3.

^ Herodian, ii.11.6.

^ Dio-Loeb 1927, lxxiv, 17.3.

^ a b Dio-Loeb 1927, lxxiv, 17.5.

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Didius Julianus, 8.8.

^ Dio-Loeb 1927, lxxv, 1.1.

^ Historia Augusta 1921, Didius Julianus, 8.10.

^ " Herodian says "in their opinion Alexander showed no honourable intention to pursue the war and preferred a life of ease, when he should have marched out to punish the Germans for their previous insolence" (Herodian vi.7.10).

^ Abbott, Frank Frost (1963). A History and Description of Roman Political Institutions. New York: Biblo and Tannen. p. 334.

^ Lee, A.D., From Rome to Byzantium AD 363 to 565: The Transformation of Ancient Rome (2013) p. xiii.

^ Mitchell, S., A History of the Later Roman Empire, AD 284–641 (2014), Chapter 1.

^ Gibbon, Edward (2012). The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire: Edited in Seven Volumes with Introduction, Notes, Appendices, and Index. Cambridge University Press. p. 66. ISBN 9781108050739.

External links

Media related to History of the Roman Empire at Wikimedia Commons

vte

Outline
Timeline

Foundation
Kingdom
overthrow
Republic

overthrow

History
Pax Romana
Principate
Dominate
Western Empire
fall
historiography of the fall
Byzantine Empire
decline
fall
Later Roman Empire
History

fall
historiography of the fall

decline
fall

History

History
Kingdom
Republic
Empire
Late Empire
Senate
Legislative assemblies
Curiate
Centuriate
Tribal
Plebeian
Executive magistrates
SPQR

Curiate
Centuriate
Tribal
Plebeian

Twelve Tables
Mos maiorum
Citizenship
Auctoritas
Imperium
Status
Litigation

Curia
Forum
Cursus honorum
Collegiality
Emperor
Legatus
Dux
Officium
Praefectus
Vicarius
Vigintisexviri
Lictor
Magister militum
Imperator
Princeps senatus
Pontifex maximus
Augustus
Caesar
Tetrarch
Optimates and populares
Province

Consul
Censor
Praetor
Tribune
Tribune of the plebs
Military tribune
Quaestor
Aedile
Promagistrate
Governor

Rex
Interrex
Dictator
Magister equitum
Decemviri
Consular tribune
Triumvir

History
Borders
Establishment
Structure
Campaigns
Political control
Strategy
Engineering
Frontiers and fortifications
castra
Technology
Army
Legion
Infantry tactics
Personal equipment
Siege engines
Siege in Ancient Rome
Navy
Auxiliaries
Decorations and punishments
Hippika gymnasia

castra

Legion
Infantry tactics
Personal equipment
Siege engines
Siege in Ancient Rome

Agriculture
Deforestation
Commerce
Finance
Currency
Republican currency
Imperial currency

Architecture
Art
Bathing
Calendar
Clothing
Cosmetics
Cuisine
Education
Family
Pater familias
Folklore
Hairstyles
Literature
Music
Mythology
Religion
Deities
Romanization
Romans
Sexuality
Spectacles
Theatre
Toys and games
Wine

Pater familias

Deities

Patricians
Plebs
Conflict of the Orders
Secessio plebis
Equites
Gens
Tribes
Assembly
Patronage
Naming conventions
Demography
Women
Marriage
Adoption
Slavery
Bagaudae

Assembly

Amphitheatres
Aqueducts
Bridges
Circuses
Civil engineering
Concrete
Domes
Metallurgy
Numerals
Roads
Sanitation
Ships
Temples
Theatres
Thermae

History
Alphabet
Versions
Old
Classical
Vulgar
Late
Medieval
Renaissance
Neo-Latin
Contemporary
Ecclesiastical
Romance languages

Old
Classical
Vulgar
Late
Medieval
Renaissance
Neo-Latin
Contemporary
Ecclesiastical

Aelius Donatus
Ammianus Marcellinus
Appuleius
Asconius Pedianus
Augustine
Aurelius Victor
Ausonius
Boëthius
Caesar
Catullus
Cassiodorus
Censorinus
Cicero
Claudian
Columella
Cornelius Nepos
Ennius
Eutropius
Fabius Pictor
Sextus Pompeius Festus
Rufus Festus
Florus
Frontinus
Fronto
Fulgentius
Gellius
Horace
Hydatius
Hyginus
Jerome
Jordanes
Julius Paulus
Justin
Juvenal
Lactantius
Livy
Lucan
Lucretius
Macrobius
Marcellus Empiricus
Marcus Aurelius
Manilius
Martial
Nicolaus Damascenus
Nonius Marcellus
Obsequens
Orosius
Ovid
Petronius
Phaedrus
Plautus
Pliny the Elder
Pliny the Younger
Pomponius Mela
Priscian
Propertius
Quadrigarius
Quintilian
Quintus Curtius Rufus
Sallust
Seneca the Elder
Seneca the Younger
Servius
Sidonius Apollinaris
Silius Italicus
Statius
Suetonius
Symmachus
Tacitus
Terence
Tertullian
Tibullus
Valerius Antias
Valerius Maximus
Varro
Velleius Paterculus
Verrius Flaccus
Vergil
Vitruvius

Aelian
Aëtius of Amida
Appian
Arrian
Cassius Dio
Diodorus Siculus
Diogenes Laërtius
Dionysius of Halicarnassus
Dioscorides
Eusebius of Caesaria
Galen
Herodian
Josephus
Julian
Libanius
Lucian
Pausanias
Philostratus
Phlegon of Tralles
Photius
Plutarch
Polyaenus
Polybius
Porphyrius
Priscus
Procopius
Simplicius of Cilicia
Sozomen
Stephanus Byzantinus
Strabo
Themistius
Theodoret
Zonaras
Zosimus

Alexandria
Antioch
Aquileia
Berytus
Bononia
Carthage
Constantinopolis
Eboracum
Leptis Magna
Londinium
Lugdunum
Lutetia
Mediolanum
Pompeii
Ravenna
Roma
Smyrna
Vindobona
Volubilis

Cities and towns
Climate
Consuls
Dictators
Distinguished women
Dynasties
Emperors
Empresses
Fiction
Film
Generals
Gentes
Geographers
Institutions
Laws
Legacy
Legions
Magistri equitum
Nomina
Pontifices maximi
Praetors
Quaestors
Tribunes
Roman–Iranian relations
External wars and battles
Civil wars and revolts

United StatesIsrael

Cubism is an early-20th-century avant-garde art movement which began in Paris. It revolutionized painting and the visual arts, and sparked artistic innovations in music, ballet, literature, and architecture.

Cubist subjects are analyzed, broken up, and reassembled in an abstract form. Instead of depicting objects from a single perspective, the artist depicts the subject from multiple perspectives to represent the subject in a greater context.[1] Cubism has been considered the most influential art movement of the 20th century.[2][3] The term cubism is broadly associated with a variety of artworks produced in Paris (Montmartre and Montparnasse) or near Paris (Puteaux) during the 1910s and throughout the 1920s.

The movement was pioneered in partnership by Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque, and joined by Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Robert Delaunay, Henri Le Fauconnier, Juan Gris, and Fernand Léger.[4] One primary influence that led to Cubism was the representation of three-dimensional form in the late works of Paul Cézanne.[2] A retrospective of Cézanne's paintings was held at the Salon d'Automne of 1904, current works were displayed at the 1905 and 1906 Salon d'Automne, followed by two commemorative retrospectives after his death in 1907.[5]

In France, offshoots of Cubism developed, including Orphism, abstract art and later Purism.[6][7] The impact of Cubism was far-reaching and wide-ranging in the arts and in popular culture. Cubism introduced collage as a modern art form. In France and other countries Futurism, Suprematism, Dada, Constructivism, De Stijl and Art Deco developed in response to Cubism.[4] Early Futurist paintings hold in common with Cubism the fusing of the past and the present, the representation of different views of the subject pictured at the same time or successively, also called multiple perspective, simultaneity or multiplicity,[8] while Constructivism was influenced by Picasso's technique of constructing sculpture from separate elements.[9] Other common threads between these disparate movements include the faceting or simplification of geometric forms, and the association of mechanization and modern life.

History

Scholars have divided the history of Cubism into phases. In one scheme, the first phase of Cubism, known as Analytic Cubism, a phrase coined by Juan Gris a posteriori,[10] was both radical and influential as a short but highly significant art movement between 1910 and 1912 in France. A second phase, Synthetic Cubism, is generally considered to run from about 1912 to 1914, characterised by simpler shapes and brighter colours, and experiments in texture and pattern, for example, using newspaper print and patterned paper.[11] Synthetic Cubism remained vital until around 1919, when the Surrealist movement gained popularity. English art historian Douglas Cooper proposed another scheme, describing three phases of Cubism in his book, The Cubist Epoch. According to Cooper there was "Early Cubism", (from 1906 to 1908) when the movement was initially developed in the studios of Picasso and Braque; the second phase being called "High Cubism", (from 1909 to 1914) during which time Juan Gris emerged as an important exponent (after 1911); and finally Cooper referred to "Late Cubism" (from 1914 to 1921) as the last phase of Cubism as a radical avant-garde movement.[12] Douglas Cooper's restrictive use of these terms to distinguish the work of Braque, Picasso, Gris (from 1911) and Léger (to a lesser extent) implied an intentional value judgement.[13]

Proto-Cubism: 1907–1908

Cubism burgeoned between 1907 and 1911. Pablo Picasso's 1907 painting Les Demoiselles d'Avignon has often been considered a proto-Cubist work.

In 1908, in his review of Georges Braque's exhibition at Kahnweiler's gallery, the critic Louis Vauxcelles called Braque a daring man who despises form, "reducing everything, places and a figures and houses, to geometric schemas, to cubes".[15][16]

Vauxcelles recounted how Matisse told him at the time, "Braque has just sent in [to the 1908 Salon d'Automne] a painting made of little cubes".[16] The critic Charles Morice relayed Matisse's words and spoke of Braque's little cubes. The motif of the viaduct at l'Estaque had inspired Braque to produce three paintings marked by the simplification of form and deconstruction of perspective.[17]

Georges Braque's 1908 Houses at L'Estaque (and related works) prompted Vauxcelles, in Gil Blas, 25 March 1909, to refer to bizarreries cubiques (cubic oddities).[18] Gertrude Stein referred to landscapes made by Picasso in 1909, such as Reservoir at Horta de Ebro, as the first Cubist paintings. The first organized group exhibition by Cubists took place at the Salon des Indépendants in Paris during the spring of 1911 in a room called 'Salle 41'; it included works by Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Fernand Léger, Robert Delaunay and Henri Le Fauconnier, yet no works by Picasso or Braque were exhibited.[13]

By 1911 Picasso was recognized as the inventor of Cubism, while Braque's importance and precedence was argued later, with respect to his treatment of space, volume and mass in the L'Estaque landscapes. But "this view of Cubism is associated with a distinctly restrictive definition of which artists are properly to be called Cubists," wrote the art historian Christopher Green: "Marginalizing the contribution of the artists who exhibited at the Salon des Indépendants in 1911 [...]"[13]

The assertion that the Cubist depiction of space, mass, time, and volume supports (rather than contradicts) the flatness of the canvas was made by Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler as early as 1920,[19] but it was subject to criticism in the 1950s and 1960s, especially by Clement Greenberg.[20]

Contemporary views of Cubism are complex, formed to some extent in response to the "Salle 41" Cubists, whose methods were too distinct from those of Picasso and Braque to be considered merely secondary to them. Alternative interpretations of Cubism have therefore developed. Wider views of Cubism include artists who were later associated with the "Salle 41" artists, e.g., Francis Picabia; the brothers Jacques Villon, Raymond Duchamp-Villon and Marcel Duchamp, who beginning in late 1911 formed the core of the Section d'Or (or the Puteaux Group); the sculptors Alexander Archipenko, Joseph Csaky and Ossip Zadkine as well as Jacques Lipchitz and Henri Laurens; and painters such as Louis Marcoussis, Roger de La Fresnaye, František Kupka, Diego Rivera, Léopold Survage, Auguste Herbin, André Lhote, Gino Severini (after 1916), María Blanchard (after 1916), and Georges Valmier (after 1918). More fundamentally, Christopher Green argues that Douglas Cooper's terms were "later undermined by interpretations of the work of Picasso, Braque, Gris and Léger that stress iconographic and ideological questions rather than methods of representation."[13]

John Berger identifies the essence of Cubism with the mechanical diagram. "The metaphorical model of Cubism is the diagram: The diagram being a visible symbolic representation of invisible processes, forces, structures. A diagram need not eschew certain aspects of appearance but these too will be treated as signs not as imitations or recreations."[21]

Early Cubism: 1909–1914

There was a distinct difference between Kahnweiler's Cubists and the Salon Cubists. Prior to 1914, Picasso, Braque, Gris and Léger (to a lesser extent) gained the support of a single committed art dealer in Paris, Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler, who guaranteed them an annual income for the exclusive right to buy their works. Kahnweiler sold only to a small circle of connoisseurs. His support gave his artists the freedom to experiment in relative privacy. Picasso worked in Montmartre until 1912, while Braque and Gris remained there until after the First World War. Léger was based in Montparnasse.[13]

In contrast, the Salon Cubists built their reputation primarily by exhibiting regularly at the Salon d'Automne and the Salon des Indépendants, both major non-academic Salons in Paris. They were inevitably more aware of public response and the need to communicate.[13] Already in 1910 a group began to form which included Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay and Léger. They met regularly at Henri le Fauconnier's studio near the boulevard du Montparnasse. These soirées often included writers such as Guillaume Apollinaire and André Salmon. Together with other young artists, the group wanted to emphasise a research into form, in opposition to the Neo-Impressionist emphasis on color.[22]

Louis Vauxcelles, in his review of the 26th Salon des Indépendants (1910), made a passing and imprecise reference to Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, Léger and Le Fauconnier as "ignorant geometers, reducing the human body, the site, to pallid cubes."[23][24] At the 1910 Salon d'Automne, a few months later, Metzinger exhibited his highly fractured Nu à la cheminée (Nude), which was subsequently reproduced in both Du "Cubisme" (1912) and Les Peintres Cubistes (1913).[25]

The first public controversy generated by Cubism resulted from Salon showings at the Indépendants during the spring of 1911. This showing by Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, le Fauconnier and Léger brought Cubism to the attention of the general public for the first time. Amongst the Cubist works presented, Robert Delaunay exhibited his Eiffel Tower, Tour Eiffel (Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York).[26]

At the Salon d'Automne of the same year, in addition to the Indépendants group of Salle 41, were exhibited works by André Lhote, Marcel Duchamp, Jacques Villon, Roger de La Fresnaye, André Dunoyer de Segonzac and František Kupka. The exhibition was reviewed in the October 8, 1911 issue of The New York Times. This article was published a year after Gelett Burgess' The Wild Men of Paris,[27] and two years prior to the Armory Show, which introduced astonished Americans, accustomed to realistic art, to the experimental styles of the European avant garde, including Fauvism, Cubism, and Futurism. The 1911 New York Times article portrayed works by Picasso, Matisse, Derain, Metzinger and others dated before 1909; not exhibited at the 1911 Salon. The article was titled The "Cubists" Dominate Paris' Fall Salon and subtitled Eccentric School of Painting Increases Its Vogue in the Current Art Exhibition – What Its Followers Attempt to Do.[28][29]

Among all the paintings on exhibition at the Paris Fall Salon none is attracting so much attention as the extraordinary productions of the so-called "Cubist" school. In fact, dispatches from Paris suggest these works are easily the main feature of the exhibition. [...]

In spite of the crazy nature of the "Cubist" theories the number of those professing them is fairly respectable. Georges Braque, André Derain, Picasso, Czobel, Othon Friesz, Herbin, Metzinger—these are a few of the names signed to canvases before which Paris has stood and now again stands in blank amazement.

What do they mean? Have those responsible for them taken leave of their senses? Is it art or madness? Who knows?[28][29]

The subsequent 1912 Salon des Indépendants located in Paris (20 March to 16 May 1912) was marked by the presentation of Marcel Duchamp's Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2, which itself caused a scandal, even amongst the Cubists. It was in fact rejected by the hanging committee, which included his brothers and other Cubists. Although the work was shown in the Salon de la Section d'Or in October 1912 and the 1913 Armory Show in New York, Duchamp never forgave his brothers and former colleagues for censoring his work.[22][30] Juan Gris, a new addition to the Salon scene, exhibited his Portrait of Picasso (Art Institute of Chicago), while Metzinger's two showings included La Femme au Cheval (Woman with a horse, 1911–1912, National Gallery of Denmark).[31] Delaunay's monumental La Ville de Paris (Musée d'art moderne de la Ville de Paris) and Léger's La Noce (The Wedding, Musée National d'Art Moderne, Paris), were also exhibited.

In 1912, Galeries Dalmau presented the first declared group exhibition of Cubism worldwide (Exposició d'Art Cubista),[32][33][34] with a controversial showing by Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Juan Gris, Marie Laurencin and Marcel Duchamp (Barcelona, 20 April to 10 May 1912). The Dalmau exhibition comprised 83 works by 26 artists.[35][36][37] Jacques Nayral's association with Gleizes led him to write the Preface for the Cubist exhibition,[32] which was fully translated and reproduced in the newspaper La Veu de Catalunya.[38][39] Duchamp's Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 was exhibited for the first time.[40]

Extensive media coverage (in newspapers and magazines) before, during and after the exhibition launched the Galeries Dalmau as a force in the development and propagation of modernism in Europe.[40] While press coverage was extensive, it was not always positive. Articles were published in the newspapers Esquella de La Torratxa[41] and El Noticiero Universal[42] attacking the Cubists with a series of caricatures laced with derogatory text.[42] Art historian Jaime Brihuega writes of the Dalmau show: "No doubt that the exhibition produced a strong commotion in the public, who welcomed it with a lot of suspicion.[43]

A major development in Cubism occurred in 1912 with Braque's and Picasso's introduction of collage in the modernist sense. Picasso is credited with creating the first Cubist collage, Still life With Chair Caning, in May 1912,[44] while Braque preceded Picasso in the creation of Cubist cardboard sculptures and papiers collés.[45] Papiers collés were often composed of pieces of everyday paper artifacts such as newspaper, table cloth, wallpaper and sheet music, whereas Cubist collages combined disparate materials—in the case of Still-life With Chair Caning, freely brushed oil paint and commercially printed oilcloth together on a canvas.[44]

The Cubist contribution to the 1912 Salon d'Automne created scandal regarding the use of government owned buildings, such as the Grand Palais, to exhibit such artwork. The indignation of the politician Jean Pierre Philippe Lampué made the front page of Le Journal, 5 October 1912.[46] The controversy spread to the Municipal Council of Paris, leading to a debate in the Chambre des Députés about the use of public funds to provide the venue for such art.[47] The Cubists were defended by the Socialist deputy, Marcel Sembat.[47][48][49]

It was against this background of public anger that Jean Metzinger and Albert Gleizes wrote Du "Cubisme" (published by Eugène Figuière in 1912, translated to English and Russian in 1913).[50] Among the works exhibited were Le Fauconnier's vast composition Les Montagnards attaqués par des ours (Mountaineers Attacked by Bears) now at Rhode Island School of Design Museum, Joseph Csaky's Deux Femme, Two Women (a sculpture now lost), in addition to the highly abstract paintings by Kupka, Amorpha (The National Gallery, Prague), and Picabia, La Source (The Spring) (Museum of Modern Art, New York).

The most extreme forms of Cubism were not those practiced by Picasso and Braque, who resisted total abstraction. Other Cubists, by contrast, especially František Kupka, and those considered Orphists by Apollinaire (Delaunay, Léger, Picabia and Duchamp), accepted abstraction by removing visible subject matter entirely. Kupka's two entries at the 1912 Salon d'Automne, Amorpha-Fugue à deux couleurs and Amorpha chromatique chaude, were highly abstract (or nonrepresentational) and metaphysical in orientation. Both Duchamp in 1912 and Picabia from 1912 to 1914 developed an expressive and allusive abstraction dedicated to complex emotional and sexual themes. Beginning in 1912 Delaunay painted a series of paintings entitled Simultaneous Windows, followed by a series entitled Formes Circulaires, in which he combined planar structures with bright prismatic hues; based on the optical characteristics of juxtaposed colors his departure from reality in the depiction of imagery was quasi-complete. In 1913–14 Léger produced a series entitled Contrasts of Forms, giving a similar stress to color, line and form. His Cubism, despite its abstract qualities, was associated with themes of mechanization and modern life. Apollinaire supported these early developments of abstract Cubism in Les Peintres cubistes (1913),[25] writing of a new "pure" painting in which the subject was vacated. But in spite of his use of the term Orphism these works were so different that they defy attempts to place them in a single category.[13]

Also labeled an Orphist by Apollinaire, Marcel Duchamp was responsible for another extreme development inspired by Cubism. The ready-made arose from a joint consideration that the work itself is considered an object (just as a painting), and that it uses the material detritus of the world (as collage and papier collé in the Cubist construction and Assemblage). The next logical step, for Duchamp, was to present an ordinary object as a self-sufficient work of art representing only itself. In 1913 he attached a bicycle wheel to a kitchen stool and in 1914 selected a bottle-drying rack as a sculpture in its own right.[13]

The Section d'Or, also known as Groupe de Puteaux, founded by some of the most conspicuous Cubists, was a collective of painters, sculptors and critics associated with Cubism and Orphism, active from 1911 through about 1914, coming to prominence in the wake of their controversial showing at the 1911 Salon des Indépendants. The Salon de la Section d'Or at the Galerie La Boétie in Paris, October 1912, was arguably the most important pre-World War I Cubist exhibition; exposing Cubism to a wide audience. Over 200 works were displayed, and the fact that many of the artists showed artworks representative of their development from 1909 to 1912 gave the exhibition the allure of a Cubist retrospective.[51]

The group seems to have adopted the name Section d'Or to distinguish themselves from the narrower definition of Cubism developed in parallel by Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque in the Montmartre quarter of Paris, and to show that Cubism, rather than being an isolated art-form, represented the continuation of a grand tradition (indeed, the golden ratio had fascinated Western intellectuals of diverse interests for at least 2,400 years).[52]

The idea of the Section d'Or originated in the course of conversations between Metzinger, Gleizes and Jacques Villon. The group's title was suggested by Villon, after reading a 1910 translation of Leonardo da Vinci's Trattato della Pittura by Joséphin Péladan.

During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Europeans were discovering African, Polynesian, Micronesian and Native American art. Artists such as Paul Gauguin, Henri Matisse, and Pablo Picasso were intrigued and inspired by the stark power and simplicity of styles of those foreign cultures. Around 1906, Picasso met Matisse through Gertrude Stein, at a time when both artists had recently acquired an interest in primitivism, Iberian sculpture, African art and African tribal masks. They became friendly rivals and competed with each other throughout their careers, perhaps leading to Picasso entering a new period in his work by 1907, marked by the influence of Greek, Iberian and African art. Picasso's paintings of 1907 have been characterized as Protocubism, as notably seen in Les Demoiselles d'Avignon, the antecedent of Cubism.[14]

Art historian Douglas Cooper says Paul Gauguin and Paul Cézanne "were particularly influential to the formation of Cubism and especially important to the paintings of Picasso during 1906 and 1907".[53] Cooper goes on to say: "The Demoiselles is generally referred to as the first Cubist picture. This is an exaggeration, for although it was a major first step towards Cubism it is not yet Cubist. The disruptive, expressionist element in it is even contrary to the spirit of Cubism, which looked at the world in a detached, realistic spirit. Nevertheless, the Demoiselles is the logical picture to take as the starting point for Cubism, because it marks the birth of a new pictorial idiom, because in it Picasso violently overturned established conventions and because all that followed grew out of it."[14]

The most serious objection to regarding the Demoiselles as the origin of Cubism, with its evident influence of primitive art, is that "such deductions are unhistorical", wrote the art historian Daniel Robbins. This familiar explanation "fails to give adequate consideration to the complexities of a flourishing art that existed just before and during the period when Picasso's new painting developed."[54] Between 1905 and 1908, a conscious search for a new style caused rapid changes in art across France, Germany, The Netherlands, Italy, and Russia. The Impressionists had used a double point of view, and both Les Nabis and the Symbolists (who also admired Cézanne) flattened the picture plane, reducing their subjects to simple geometric forms. Neo-Impressionist structure and subject matter, most notably to be seen in the works of Georges Seurat (e.g., Parade de Cirque, Le Chahut and Le Cirque), was another important influence. There were also parallels in the development of literature and social thought.[54]

In addition to Seurat, the roots of cubism are to be found in the two distinct tendencies of Cézanne's later work: first his breaking of the painted surface into small multifaceted areas of paint, thereby emphasizing the plural viewpoint given by binocular vision, and second his interest in the simplification of natural forms into cylinders, spheres, and cones. However, the cubists explored this concept further than Cézanne. They represented all the surfaces of depicted objects in a single picture plane, as if the objects had all their faces visible at the same time. This new kind of depiction revolutionized the way objects could be visualized in painting and art.

The historical study of Cubism began in the late 1920s, drawing at first from sources of limited data, namely the opinions of Guillaume Apollinaire. It came to rely heavily on Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler's book Der Weg zum Kubismus (published in 1920), which centered on the developments of Picasso, Braque, Léger, and Gris. The terms "analytical" and "synthetic" which subsequently emerged have been widely accepted since the mid-1930s. Both terms are historical impositions that occurred after the facts they identify. Neither phase was designated as such at the time corresponding works were created. "If Kahnweiler considers Cubism as Picasso and Braque," wrote Daniel Robbins, "our only fault is in subjecting other Cubists' works to the rigors of that limited definition."[54]

The traditional interpretation of "Cubism", formulated post facto as a means of understanding the works of Braque and Picasso, has affected our appreciation of other twentieth-century artists. It is difficult to apply to painters such as Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Robert Delaunay and Henri Le Fauconnier, whose fundamental differences from traditional Cubism compelled Kahnweiler to question whether to call them Cubists at all. According to Daniel Robbins, "To suggest that merely because these artists developed differently or varied from the traditional pattern they deserved to be relegated to a secondary or satellite role in Cubism is a profound mistake."[54]

The history of the term "Cubism" usually stresses the fact that Matisse referred to "cubes" in connection with a painting by Braque in 1908, and that the term was published twice by the critic Louis Vauxcelles in a similar context. However, the word "cube" was used in 1906 by another critic, Louis Chassevent, with reference not to Picasso or Braque but rather to Metzinger and Delaunay:

The critical use of the word "cube" goes back at least to May 1901 when Jean Béral, reviewing the work of Henri-Edmond Cross at the Indépendants in Art et Littérature, commented that he "uses a large and square pointillism, giving the impression of mosaic. One even wonders why the artist has not used cubes of solid matter diversely colored: they would make pretty revetments." (Robert Herbert, 1968, p. 221)[56]

The term Cubism did not come into general usage until 1911, mainly with reference to Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, and Léger.[54] In 1911, the poet and critic Guillaume Apollinaire accepted the term on behalf of a group of artists invited to exhibit at the Brussels Indépendants. The following year, in preparation for the Salon de la Section d'Or, Metzinger and Gleizes wrote and published Du "Cubisme"[57] in an effort to dispel the confusion raging around the word, and as a major defence of Cubism (which had caused a public scandal following the 1911 Salon des Indépendants and the 1912 Salon d'Automne in Paris).[58] Clarifying their aims as artists, this work was the first theoretical treatise on Cubism and it still remains the clearest and most intelligible. The result, not solely a collaboration between its two authors, reflected discussions by the circle of artists who met in Puteaux and Courbevoie. It mirrored the attitudes of the "artists of Passy", which included Picabia and the Duchamp brothers, to whom sections of it were read prior to publication.[13][54] The concept developed in Du "Cubisme" of observing a subject from different points in space and time simultaneously, i.e., the act of moving around an object to seize it from several successive angles fused into a single image (multiple viewpoints, mobile perspective, simultaneity or multiplicity), is a generally recognized device used by the Cubists.[59]

The 1912 manifesto Du "Cubisme" by Metzinger and Gleizes was followed in 1913 by Les Peintres Cubistes, a collection of reflections and commentaries by Guillaume Apollinaire.[25] Apollinaire had been closely involved with Picasso beginning in 1905, and Braque beginning in 1907, but gave as much attention to artists such as Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, Picabia, and Duchamp.[13]

The fact that the 1912 exhibition had been curated to show the successive stages through which Cubism had transited, and that Du "Cubisme" had been published for the occasion, indicates the artists' intention of making their work comprehensible to a wide audience (art critics, art collectors, art dealers and the general public). Undoubtedly, due to the great success of the exhibition, Cubism became avant-garde movement recognized as a genre or style in art with a specific common philosophy or goal.[51]

Crystal Cubism: 1914–1918

A significant modification of Cubism between 1914 and 1916 was signaled by a shift towards a strong emphasis on large overlapping geometric planes and flat surface activity. This grouping of styles of painting and sculpture, especially significant between 1917 and 1920, was practiced by several artists; particularly those under contract with the art dealer and collector Léonce Rosenberg. The tightening of the compositions, the clarity and sense of order reflected in these works, led to its being referred to by the critic Maurice Raynal as 'crystal' Cubism. Considerations manifested by Cubists prior to the outset of World War I—such as the fourth dimension, dynamism of modern life, the occult, and Henri Bergson's concept of duration—had now been vacated, replaced by a purely formal frame of reference.[60]

Crystal Cubism, and its associative rappel à l'ordre, has been linked with an inclination—by those who served the armed forces and by those who remained in the civilian sector—to escape the realities of the Great War, both during and directly following the conflict. The purifying of Cubism from 1914 through the mid-1920s, with its cohesive unity and voluntary constraints, has been linked to a much broader ideological transformation towards conservatism in both French society and French culture.[13]

Cubism after 1918

The most innovative period of Cubism was before 1914.[citation needed] After World War I, with the support given by the dealer Léonce Rosenberg, Cubism returned as a central issue for artists, and continued as such until the mid-1920s when its avant-garde status was rendered questionable by the emergence of geometric abstraction and Surrealism in Paris. Many Cubists, including Picasso, Braque, Gris, Léger, Gleizes, Metzinger and Emilio Pettoruti while developing other styles, returned periodically to Cubism, even well after 1925. Cubism reemerged during the 1920s and the 1930s in the work of the American Stuart Davis and the Englishman Ben Nicholson. In France, however, Cubism experienced a decline beginning in about 1925. Léonce Rosenberg exhibited not only the artists stranded by Kahnweiler's exile but others including Laurens, Lipchitz, Metzinger, Gleizes, Csaky, Herbin and Severini. In 1918 Rosenberg presented a series of Cubist exhibitions at his Galerie de l'Effort Moderne in Paris. Attempts were made by Louis Vauxcelles to argue that Cubism was dead, but these exhibitions, along with a well-organized Cubist show at the 1920 Salon des Indépendants and a revival of the Salon de la Section d'Or in the same year, demonstrated it was still alive.[13]

The reemergence of Cubism coincided with the appearance from about 1917 to 1924 of a coherent body of theoretical writing by Pierre Reverdy, Maurice Raynal and Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler and, among the artists, by Gris, Léger and Gleizes. The occasional return to classicism—figurative work either exclusively or alongside Cubist work—experienced by many artists during this period (called Neoclassicism) has been linked to the tendency to evade the realities of the war and also to the cultural dominance of a classical or Latin image of France during and immediately following the war. Cubism after 1918 can be seen as part of a wide ideological shift towards conservatism in both French society and culture. Yet, Cubism itself remained evolutionary both within the oeuvre of individual artists, such as Gris and Metzinger, and across the work of artists as different from each other as Braque, Léger and Gleizes. Cubism as a publicly debated movement became relatively unified and open to definition. Its theoretical purity made it a gauge against which such diverse tendencies as Realism or Naturalism, Dada, Surrealism and abstraction could be compared.[13]

Japan and China were among the first countries in Asia to be influenced by Cubism. Contact first occurred via European texts translated and published in Japanese art journals in the 1910s. In the 1920s, Japanese and Chinese artists who studied in Paris, for example those enrolled at the École nationale supérieure des Beaux-Arts, brought back with them both an understanding of modern art movements, including Cubism. Notable works exhibiting Cubist qualities were Tetsugorō Yorozu's Self Portrait with Red Eyes (1912) and Fang Ganmin's Melody in Autumn (1934).[62][63]

Interpretation

Intentions and criticism

The Cubism of Picasso and Braque had more than a technical or formal significance, and the distinct attitudes and intentions of the Salon Cubists produced different kinds of Cubism, rather than a derivative of their work. "It is by no means clear, in any case," wrote Christopher Green, "to what extent these other Cubists depended on Picasso and Braque for their development of such techniques as faceting, 'passage' and multiple perspective; they could well have arrived at such practices with little knowledge of 'true' Cubism in its early stages, guided above all by their own understanding of Cézanne." The works exhibited by these Cubists at the 1911 and 1912 Salons extended beyond the conventional Cézanne-like subjects—the posed model, still-life and landscape—favored by Picasso and Braque to include large-scale modern-life subjects. Aimed at a large public, these works stressed the use of multiple perspective and complex planar faceting for expressive effect while preserving the eloquence of subjects endowed with literary and philosophical connotations.[13]

In Du "Cubisme" Metzinger and Gleizes explicitly related the sense of time to multiple perspective, giving symbolic expression to the notion of 'duration' proposed by the philosopher Henri Bergson according to which life is subjectively experienced as a continuum, with the past flowing into the present and the present merging into the future. The Salon Cubists used the faceted treatment of solid and space and effects of multiple viewpoints to convey a physical and psychological sense of the fluidity of consciousness, blurring the distinctions between past, present and future. One of the major theoretical innovations made by the Salon Cubists, independently of Picasso and Braque, was that of simultaneity,[13] drawing to greater or lesser extent on theories of Henri Poincaré, Ernst Mach, Charles Henry, Maurice Princet, and Henri Bergson. With simultaneity, the concept of separate spatial and temporal dimensions was comprehensively challenged. Linear perspective developed during the Renaissance was vacated. The subject matter was no longer considered from a specific point of view at a moment in time, but built following a selection of successive viewpoints, i.e., as if viewed simultaneously from numerous angles (and in multiple dimensions) with the eye free to roam from one to the other.[59]

This technique of representing simultaneity, multiple viewpoints (or relative motion) is pushed to a high degree of complexity in Metzinger's Nu à la cheminée, exhibited at the 1910 Salon d'Automne; Gleizes' monumental Le Dépiquage des Moissons (Harvest Threshing), exhibited at the 1912 Salon de la Section d'Or; Le Fauconnier's Abundance shown at the Indépendants of 1911; and Delaunay's City of Paris, exhibited at the Indépendants in 1912. These ambitious works are some of the largest paintings in the history of Cubism. Léger's The Wedding, also shown at the Salon des Indépendants in 1912, gave form to the notion of simultaneity by presenting different motifs as occurring within a single temporal frame, where responses to the past and present interpenetrate with collective force. The conjunction of such subject matter with simultaneity aligns Salon Cubism with early Futurist paintings by Umberto Boccioni, Gino Severini and Carlo Carrà; themselves made in response to early Cubism.[8]

Cubism and modern European art was introduced into the United States at the now legendary 1913 Armory Show in New York City, which then traveled to Chicago and Boston. In the Armory show Pablo Picasso exhibited La Femme au pot de moutarde (1910), the sculpture Head of a Woman (Fernande) (1909–10), Les Arbres (1907) amongst other cubist works. Jacques Villon exhibited seven important and large drypoints, while his brother Marcel Duchamp shocked the American public with his painting Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912). Francis Picabia exhibited his abstractions La Danse à la source and La Procession, Seville (both of 1912). Albert Gleizes exhibited La Femme aux phlox (1910) and L'Homme au balcon (1912), two highly stylized and faceted cubist works. Georges Braque, Fernand Léger, Raymond Duchamp-Villon, Roger de La Fresnaye and Alexander Archipenko also contributed examples of their cubist works.

Cubist sculpture

Just as in painting, Cubist sculpture is rooted in Paul Cézanne's reduction of painted objects into component planes and geometric solids (cubes, spheres, cylinders, and cones). And just as in painting, it became a pervasive influence and contributed fundamentally to Constructivism and Futurism.

Cubist sculpture developed in parallel to Cubist painting. During the autumn of 1909 Picasso sculpted Head of a Woman (Fernande) with positive features depicted by negative space and vice versa. According to Douglas Cooper: "The first true Cubist sculpture was Picasso's impressive Woman's Head, modeled in 1909–10, a counterpart in three dimensions to many similar analytical and faceted heads in his paintings at the time."[12] These positive/negative reversals were ambitiously exploited by Alexander Archipenko in 1912–13, for example in Woman Walking.[13] Joseph Csaky, after Archipenko, was the first sculptor in Paris to join the Cubists, with whom he exhibited from 1911 onwards. They were followed by Raymond Duchamp-Villon and then in 1914 by Jacques Lipchitz, Henri Laurens and Ossip Zadkine.[66][67]

Indeed, Cubist construction was as influential as any pictorial Cubist innovation. It was the stimulus behind the proto-Constructivist work of both Naum Gabo and Vladimir Tatlin and thus the starting-point for the entire constructive tendency in 20th-century modernist sculpture.[13]

Architecture

Cubism formed an important link between early-20th-century art and architecture.[68] The historical, theoretical, and socio-political relationships between avant-garde practices in painting, sculpture and architecture had early ramifications in France, Germany, the Netherlands and Czechoslovakia. Though there are many points of intersection between Cubism and architecture, only a few direct links between them can be drawn. Most often the connections are made by reference to shared formal characteristics: faceting of form, spatial ambiguity, transparency, and multiplicity.[68]

Architectural interest in Cubism centered on the dissolution and reconstitution of three-dimensional form, using simple geometric shapes, juxtaposed without the illusions of classical perspective. Diverse elements could be superimposed, made transparent or penetrate one another, while retaining their spatial relationships. Cubism had become an influential factor in the development of modern architecture from 1912 (La Maison Cubiste, by Raymond Duchamp-Villon and André Mare) onwards, developing in parallel with architects such as Peter Behrens and Walter Gropius, with the simplification of building design, the use of materials appropriate to industrial production, and the increased use of glass.[69]

Cubism was relevant to an architecture seeking a style that needed not refer to the past. Thus, what had become a revolution in both painting and sculpture was applied as part of "a profound reorientation towards a changed world".[69][70] The Cubo-Futurist ideas of Filippo Tommaso Marinetti influenced attitudes in avant-garde architecture. The influential De Stijl movement embraced the aesthetic principles of Neo-plasticism developed by Piet Mondrian under the influence of Cubism in Paris. De Stijl was also linked by Gino Severini to Cubist theory through the writings of Albert Gleizes. However, the linking of basic geometric forms with inherent beauty and ease of industrial application—which had been prefigured by Marcel Duchamp from 1914—was left to the founders of Purism, Amédée Ozenfant and Charles-Édouard Jeanneret (better known as Le Corbusier,) who exhibited paintings together in Paris and published Après le cubisme in 1918.[69] Le Corbusier's ambition had been to translate the properties of his own style of Cubism to architecture. Between 1918 and 1922, Le Corbusier concentrated his efforts on Purist theory and painting. In 1922, Le Corbusier and his cousin Jeanneret opened a studio in Paris at 35 rue de Sèvres. His theoretical studies soon advanced into many different architectural projects.[71]

La Maison Cubiste (Cubist House)

At the 1912 Salon d'Automne an architectural installation was exhibited that quickly became known as Maison Cubiste (Cubist House), with architecture by Raymond Duchamp-Villon and interior decoration by André Mare along with a group of collaborators. Metzinger and Gleizes in Du "Cubisme", written during the assemblage of the "Maison Cubiste", wrote about the autonomous nature of art, stressing the point that decorative considerations should not govern the spirit of art. Decorative work, to them, was the "antithesis of the picture". "The true picture" wrote Metzinger and Gleizes, "bears its raison d'être within itself. It can be moved from a church to a drawing-room, from a museum to a study. Essentially independent, necessarily complete, it need not immediately satisfy the mind: on the contrary, it should lead it, little by little, towards the fictitious depths in which the coordinative light resides. It does not harmonize with this or that ensemble; it harmonizes with things in general, with the universe: it is an organism...".[72]

La Maison Cubiste was a fully furnished model house, with a  facade, a staircase, wrought iron banisters, and two rooms:  a living room—the Salon Bourgeois, where paintings by Marcel Duchamp, Metzinger (Woman with a Fan), Gleizes, Laurencin and Léger were hung, and a bedroom. It was an example of L'art décoratif, a home within which Cubist art could be displayed in the comfort and style of modern, bourgeois life. Spectators at the Salon d'Automne passed through the plaster facade, designed by Duchamp-Villon, to the two furnished rooms.[73] This architectural installation was subsequently exhibited at the 1913 Armory Show, New York, Chicago and Boston,[74] listed in the catalogue of the New York exhibit as Raymond Duchamp-Villon, number 609, and entitled "Facade architectural, plaster" (Façade architecturale).[75][76]

The furnishings, wallpaper, upholstery and carpets of the interior were designed by André Mare, and were early examples of the influence of cubism on what would become Art Deco.  They were composed of very brightly colored roses and other floral patterns in stylized geometric forms.

Mare called the living room in which Cubist paintings were hung the Salon Bourgeois. Léger described this name as 'perfect'. In a letter to Mare prior to the exhibition Léger wrote: "Your idea is absolutely splendid for us, really splendid. People will see Cubism in its domestic setting, which is very important.[2]

"Mare's ensembles were accepted as frames for Cubist works because they allowed paintings and sculptures their independence", Christopher Green wrote, "creating a play of contrasts, hence the involvement not only of Gleizes and Metzinger themselves, but of Marie Laurencin, the Duchamp brothers (Raymond Duchamp-Villon designed the facade) and Mare's old friends Léger and Roger La Fresnaye".[77]

In 1927, Cubists Joseph Csaky, Jacques Lipchitz, Louis Marcoussis, Henri Laurens, the sculptor Gustave Miklos, and others collaborated in the decoration of a Studio House, rue Saint-James, Neuilly-sur-Seine, designed by the architect Paul Ruaud and owned by the French fashion designer Jacques Doucet, also a collector of Post-Impressionist and Cubist paintings (including Les Demoiselles d'Avignon, which he bought directly from Picasso's studio). Laurens designed the fountain, Csaky designed Doucet's staircase,[78] Lipchitz made the fireplace mantel, and Marcoussis made a Cubist rug.[79][80]
[81]

Czech Cubist architecture

The original Cubist architecture is very rare. Cubism was applied to architecture only in Bohemia (today Czech Republic) and especially in its capital, Prague.[82][83] Czech architects were the first and only ones to ever design original Cubist buildings.[84] Cubist architecture flourished for the most part between 1910 and 1914, but the Cubist or Cubism-influenced buildings were also built after World War I. After the war, the architectural style called Rondo-Cubism was developed in Prague fusing the Cubist architecture with round shapes.[85]

In their theoretical rules, the Cubist architects expressed the requirement of dynamism, which would surmount the matter and calm contained in it, through a creative idea, so that the result would evoke feelings of dynamism and expressive plasticity in the viewer. This should be achieved by shapes derived from pyramids, cubes and prisms, by arrangements and compositions of oblique surfaces, mainly triangular, sculpted facades in protruding crystal-like units, reminiscent of the so-called diamond cut, or even cavernous that are reminiscent of the late Gothic architecture. In this way, the entire surfaces of the facades including even the gables and dormers are sculpted. The grilles as well as other architectural ornaments attain a three-dimensional form. Thus, new forms of windows and doors were also created, e. g. hexagonal windows.[85] Czech Cubist architects also designed Cubist furniture.

The leading Cubist architects were Pavel Janák, Josef Gočár, Vlastislav Hofman, Emil Králíček and Josef Chochol.[85] They worked mostly in Prague but also in other Bohemian towns. The best-known Cubist building is the House of the Black Madonna in the Old Town of Prague built in 1912 by Josef Gočár with the only Cubist café in the world, Grand Café Orient.[82] Vlastislav Hofman built the entrance pavilions of Ďáblice Cemetery in 1912–1914, Josef Chochol designed several residential houses under Vyšehrad. A Cubist streetlamp has also been preserved near the Wenceslas Square, designed by Emil Králíček in 1912, who also built the Diamond House in the New Town of Prague around 1913.

Cubism in other fields

The influence of Cubism extended to other artistic fields, outside painting and sculpture. In literature, the written works of Gertrude Stein employ repetition and repetitive phrases as building blocks in both passages and whole chapters. Most of Stein's important works utilize this technique, including the novel The Making of Americans (1906–08). Not only were they the first important patrons of Cubism, Gertrude Stein and her brother Leo were also important influences on Cubism as well. In turn, Picasso was an important influence on Stein's writing. In the field of American fiction, William Faulkner's 1930 novel As I Lay Dying can be read as an interaction with the cubist mode. The novel features narratives of the diverse experiences of 15 characters which, when taken together, produce a single cohesive body.

The poets generally associated with Cubism are Guillaume Apollinaire, Blaise Cendrars, Jean Cocteau, Max Jacob, André Salmon and Pierre Reverdy. As American poet Kenneth Rexroth explains, Cubism in poetry "is the conscious, deliberate dissociation and recombination of elements into a new artistic entity made self-sufficient by its rigorous architecture. This is quite different from the free association of the Surrealists and the combination of unconscious utterance and political nihilism of Dada."[86] Nonetheless, the Cubist poets' influence on both Cubism and the later movements of Dada and Surrealism was profound; Louis Aragon, founding member of Surrealism, said that for Breton, Soupault, Éluard and himself, Reverdy was "our immediate elder, the exemplary poet."[87] Though not as well remembered as the Cubist painters, these poets continue to influence and inspire; American poets John Ashbery and Ron Padgett have recently produced new translations of Reverdy's work. Wallace Stevens' "Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird" is also said to demonstrate how cubism's multiple perspectives can be translated into poetry.[88] Ballet's first cubist sets and costumes were designed by Picasso in 1917 for Sergei Diaghilev's Parade.[89] This preceded six more ballets in which Picasso "left a mark on the ballet world, influencing generations of designers and choreographers".[90] Braque followed suit with four ballets of his own commencing in 1924 Diaghliev's Les Fâcheux.[91][92]  Gris as well designed sets and costumes for Diaghilev's Ballet Russes.[93][94] Artists such as the prolific poster designers A.M. Cassandre[95] and Edward McKnight Kauffer popularized Cubism in the fields of commercial graphic design and typography.[96] Paul Poiret and Callot Soeurs were among the couturiers that brought cubist elements—such as overlapping layers and flat planes that obscure the volumes of the body—into the world of fashion design.[97]

John Berger said: "It is almost impossible to exaggerate the importance of Cubism. It was a revolution in the visual arts as great as that which took place in the early Renaissance. Its effects on later art, on film, and on architecture are already so numerous that we hardly notice them."[98]

Gallery

Georges Braque, 1909–10, La guitare (Mandora, La Mandore), oil on canvas, 71.1 x 55.9 cm, Tate Modern, London



Albert Gleizes, 1910, La Femme aux Phlox (Woman with Phlox), oil on canvas, 81 x 100 cm, Museum of Fine Arts, Houston. Exhibited in Room 41, Salon des Indépendants 1911, Armory Show 1913



Georges Braque, 1910, Violin and Candlestick, oil on canvas, 60.96 x 50.17 cm, San Francisco Museum of Modern Art



Jean Metzinger, 1910–11, Deux Nus (Two Nudes, Two Women), oil on canvas, 92 x 66 cm, Gothenburg Museum of Art, Sweden. Exhibited at the first Cubist manifestation, Room 41 of the 1911 Salon des Indépendants, Paris



Robert Delaunay, 1910–11, La ville no. 2, oil on canvas, 146 x 114 cm, Musée National d'Art Moderne, Paris



Henri Le Fauconnier, 1910–11, L'Abondance (Abundance), oil on canvas, 191 x 123 cm, Kunstmuseum Den Haag[99]



Marcel Duchamp, 1911, La sonate (Sonata), oil on canvas, 145.1 x 113.3 cm, Philadelphia Museum of Art



Pablo Picasso, 1911, La Femme au Violon, oil on canvas, private collection, on long-term loan to Bavarian State Painting Collections, Pinakothek der Moderne, Munich



Fernand Léger, 1911–1912, Les Fumeurs (The Smokers), oil on canvas, 129.2 x 96.5 cm, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York



Georges Braque, 1911–12, Man with a Guitar (Figure, L'homme à la guitare), oil on canvas, 116.2 x 80.9 cm, Museum of Modern Art



Jacques Villon, 1912, Girl at the Piano (Fillette au piano), oil on canvas, 129.2 x 96.4 cm, oval, Museum of Modern Art, New York. Exhibited at the 1913 Armory Show



Francis Picabia, 1912, La Source (The Spring), oil on canvas, 249.6 x 249.3 cm, Museum of Modern Art, New York



Fernand Léger, 1912–13, Nude Model in the Studio (Le modèle nu dans l'atelier), oil on burlap, 128.6 x 95.9 cm, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York



Albert Gleizes, 1912–13, Les Joueurs de football (Football Players), oil on canvas, 225.4 x 183 cm, National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C.



Jean Metzinger, 1912–1913, L'Oiseau bleu (The Blue Bird), oil on canvas, 230 x 196 cm, Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris. Exhibited at the Salon des Indépendants, 1913



Pablo Picasso, 1913–14, Femme assise dans un fauteuil (Eva), Woman in an Armchair, oil on canvas, 149.9 x 99.4 cm, Leonard A. Lauder Cubist Collection



Juan Gris, 1915, Nature morte à la nappe à carreaux (Still Life with Checked Tablecloth), oil and graphite on canvas, 116.5 x 89.2 cm, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Leonard A. Lauder collection



Diego Rivera, 1915, Portrait of Ramón Gómez de la Serna, 109.6 × 90.2 cm. Latin American Art Museum of Buenos Aires



Jean Metzinger, April 1916, Femme au miroir (Femme à sa toilette, Lady at her Dressing Table), oil on canvas, 92.4 x 65.1 cm, private collection



Juan Gris, October 1916, Portrait of Josette, oil on canvas, 116 x 73 cm, Museo Reina Sofia, Madrid



Pablo Picasso, 1918, Arlequin au violon (Harlequin with Violin), oil on canvas, 142 x 100.3 cm, The Cleveland Museum of Art, Ohio



Gino Severini, 1919, Bohémien Jouant de L'Accordéon (The Accordion Player), Museo del Novecento, Milan



Albert Gleizes, 1920, Femme au gant noir (Woman with Black Glove), oil on canvas, 126 x 100 cm, National Gallery of Australia

Press articles and reviews

Paintings by Albert Gleizes, 1910–11, Paysage, Landscape; Juan Gris (drawing); Jean Metzinger, c. 1911, Nature morte, Compotier et cruche décorée de cerfs. Published on the front page of El Correo Catalán, 25 April 1912



(center) Jean Metzinger, c. 1913, Le Fumeur (Man with Pipe), Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh; (left) Alexander Archipenko, 1914, Danseuse du Médrano (Médrano II), (right) Archipenko, 1913, Pierrot-carrousel, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York. Published in Le Petit Comtois, 13 March 1914



Paintings by Fernand Léger, 1912, La Femme en Bleu, Woman in Blue, Kunstmuseum Basel; Jean Metzinger, 1912,  Dancer in a café, Albright-Knox Art Gallery; and sculpture by Alexander Archipenko, 1912, La Vie Familiale, Family Life (destroyed). Published in Les Annales politiques et littéraires, n. 1529, 13 October 1912



Paintings by Gino Severini, 1911, La Danse du Pan-Pan, and Severini, 1913, L'autobus. Published in "Les Annales politiques et littéraires", Le Paradoxe Cubiste, 14 March 1920



Paintings by Gino Severini, 1911, Souvenirs de Voyage; Albert Gleizes, 1912, Man on a Balcony, L’Homme au balcon; Severini, 1912–13, Portrait de Mlle Jeanne Paul-Fort; Luigi Russolo, 1911–12, La Révolte. Published in "Les Annales politiques et littéraires", Le Paradoxe Cubiste (continued), n. 1916, 14 March 1920



Paintings by Henri Le Fauconnier, 1910–11, L'Abondance, Kunstmuseum The Hague; Jean Metzinger, 1911, Le goûter (Tea Time), Philadelphia Museum of Art; Robert Delaunay, 1910–11, La Tour Eiffel. Published in La Veu de Catalunya, 1 February 1912



Jean Metzinger, 1910–11, Paysage (whereabouts unknown); Gino Severini, 1911, La danseuse obsedante; Albert Gleizes, 1912, l'Homme au Balcon, Man on a Balcony (Portrait of Dr. Théo Morinaud). Published in "Les Annales politiques et littéraires", Sommaire du n. 1536, décembre 1912



Jean Metzinger, c. 1911, Nature morte, Compotier et cruche décorée de cerfs; Juan Gris, 1911, Study for Man in a Café; Marie Laurencin, c. 1911, Testa ab plechs; August Agero, sculpture, Bust; Juan Gris, 1912, Guitar and Glasses, or Banjo and Glasses. Published in Veu de Catalunya, 25 April 1912



Jean Metzinger, 1911, Le goûter (Tea Time), Philadelphia Museum of Art. Published in Le Journal, 30 September 1911



Paintings by Juan Gris, Bodegón; August Agero (sculpture); Jean Metzinger, 1910–11, Deux Nus, Two Nudes, Gothenburg Museum of Art; Marie Laurencin (acrylic); Albert Gleizes, 1911, Paysage, Landscape. Published in La Publicidad, 26 April 1912



Umberto Boccioni, 1911, La rue entre dans la maison; Luigi Russolo, 1911, Souvenir d’une nuit. Published in Les Annales politiques et littéraires, 1 December 1912



Francis Picabia, paintings published in the New York Tribune, 9 March 1913. Picabia held his first one-man show in New York, Exhibition of New York studies by Francis Picabia, at 291 art gallery (formerly Little Galleries of the Photo-Secession), March 17 - April 5, 1913



Joseph Csaky, Head, 1913, plaster lost; Robert Delaunay, Hommage à Blériot, 1914 (Kunstmuseum Basel); Henri Ottmann, The Hat Seller, published in The Sun, New York, 15 March 1914



Albert Gleizes, (left) in front of his painting Jazz; Jean Crotti (center) studying his Femme à la toque rouge; Marcel Duchamp (right) at his drawing board, in front of Jacques Villon's Portrait de M. J. B. peintre, The Sun, New York, 2 January 1916



Albert Gleizes (with Chal Post, 1915); Marcel Duchamp (with his brother Jacques Villon's Portrait de M. J. B. peintre (Jacques Bon) 1914); Jean Crotti; Hugo Robus; Stanton Macdonald-Wright; and Frances Simpson Stevens (center), Every Week, Vol. 4, No. 14, April 2, 1917, p. 14



 Jean Metzinger, April 1916, Femme au miroir (Femme à sa toilette, Lady at her Dressing Table), The Sun, New York, Sunday 28 April 1918

See also

Fourth dimension in art
Precisionism
Proto-Cubism
Rayonism
Section d'Or
Vorticism

References

^ Jean Metzinger, Note sur la peinture, Pan (Paris), October–November 1910

^ a b c "The Collection | MoMA". The Museum of Modern Art. Archived from the original on August 13, 2014.

^ Cubism: The Leonard A. Lauder Collection, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 2014 Archived 2015-05-17 at the Wayback Machine

^ a b "The Collection | MoMA". The Museum of Modern Art. Archived from the original on June 13, 2014.

^ Joann Moser, Jean Metzinger in Retrospect, Pre-Cubist works, 1904–1909, The University of Iowa Museum of Art, J. Paul Getty Trust, University of Washington Press 1985, pp. 34–42

^ "The Collection | MoMA". The Museum of Modern Art.

^ Magdalena Dabrowski, Geometric Abstraction, Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 2000

^ a b "The Collection | MoMA". The Museum of Modern Art. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015.

^ "The Collection | MoMA". The Museum of Modern Art. Archived from the original on October 24, 2008.

^ Honour, H. and J. Fleming, (2009) A World History of Art. 7th edn. London: Laurence King Publishing, p. 784. ISBN 9781856695848

^ Tate. "Synthetic cubism". Tate. Retrieved 2025-03-07.

^ a b Douglas Cooper, "The Cubist Epoch", pp. 11–221, 232, Phaidon Press Limited 1970 in association with the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and the Metropolitan Museum of Art ISBN 0-87587-041-4

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Christopher Green, 2009, Cubism, MoMA, Grove Art Online, Oxford University Press Archived 2014-08-13 at the Wayback Machine

^ a b c Cooper, 24

^ Louis Vauxcelles, Exposition Braques, Gil Blas, 14 November 1908, Gallica (BnF)

^ a b Danchev, Alex (March 29, 2007). Georges Braque: A Life. Penguin Books Limited. ISBN 9780141905006 – via Google Books.

^ Futurism in Paris – The Avant-garde Explosion, Centre Pompidou, Paris 2008

^ Louis Vauxcelles, Le Salon des Indépendants, Gil Blas, 25 March 1909, Gallica (BnF)

^ D.-H. Kahnweiler. Der Weg zum Kubismus (Munich, 1920; Eng. trans., New York, 1949)

^ C. Greenberg. The Pasted-paper Revolution, ARTnews, 57 (1958), pp. 46–49, 60–61 (Internet Archive); repr. as 'Collage' in Art and Culture (Boston, 1961), pp. 70–83

^ Berger, John (1969). The Moment of Cubism. New York, NY: Pantheon. ISBN 9780297177098.

^ a b "Fondation Gleizes, Chronologie (in French)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 12, 2008.

^ "Gil Blas / dir. A. Dumont". Gallica. March 18, 1910.

^ Daniel Robbins, Jean Metzinger: At the Center of Cubism, 1985, Jean Metzinger in Retrospect, The University of Iowa Museum of Art, J. Paul Getty Trust, University of Washington Press

^ a b c Guillaume Apollinaire, Les Peintres cubistes: Méditations esthétiques (Paris, 1913)

^ "Eiffel Tower". The Guggenheim Museums and Foundation. Archived from the original on February 28, 2014.

^ "The Wild Men of Paris". www.architecturalrecord.com. Archived from the original on April 24, 2016.

^ a b "Eccentric School of Painting Increases Its Vogue in the Current Art Exhibition --- What Its Followers Attempt to Do". October 8, 1911. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 – via NYTimes.com.

^ a b "The "Cubists" Dominate Paris' Fall Salon, The New York Times, October 8, 1911 (High-resolution PDF)" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09.

^ "Nude Descending a Staircase (No. 2)". philamuseum.org. Archived from the original on September 18, 2017.

^ "Statens Museum for Kunst, National Gallery of Denmark, Jean Metzinger, 1911–12, Woman with a Horse, oil on canvas, 162 × 130 cm". Archived from the original on January 15, 2012.

^ a b Mark Antliff and Patricia Leighten, A Cubism Reader, Documents and Criticism, 1906–1914, University of Chicago Press, 2008, pp. 293–295

^ Carol A. Hess, Manuel de Falla and Modernism in Spain, 1898–1936, University of Chicago Press, 2001, p. 76, ISBN 0226330389

^ Commemoració del centenari del cubisme a Barcelona. 1912–2012, Associació Catalana de Crítics d'Art – ACCA

^ Mercè Vidal, L'exposició d'Art Cubista de les Galeries Dalmau 1912, Edicions Universitat Barcelona, 1996, ISBN 8447513831

^ David Cottington, Cubism in the Shadow of War: The Avant-garde and Politics in Paris 1905–1914, Yale University Press, 1998, ISBN 0300075294

^ "Exposició d'Art Cubista". Dalmau Galleries.

^ Joaquim Folch i Torres, Els Cubistes a cân Dalmau, Pàgina artística de La Veu de Catalunya Archived 2018-04-22 at the Wayback Machine (Barcelona) 18 April 1912, Any 22, núm. 4637–4652 (16–30 abr. 1912)

^ Joaquim Folch y Torres, "El cubisme", Pàgina Artística de La Veu, La Veu de Catalunya Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine, 25 April 1912 (includes numerous articles on the artists and exhibition)

^ a b William H. Robinson, Jordi Falgàs, Carmen Belen Lord, Barcelona and Modernity: Picasso, Gaudí, Miró, Dalí, Cleveland Museum of Art, Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York), Yale University Press, 2006, ISBN 0300121067

^ Cubist caricature, Esquella de La Torratxa, Núm 1740 (3 maig 1912)

^ a b "[Exposició d'Art Cubista – Noticiero Universal]". Dalmau Galleries.

^ Jaime Brihuega, Las Vanguardias Artísticas en España 1909–1936, Madrid. Istmo.1981

^ a b Rubin, William, Pablo Picasso, Georges Braque, and Museum of Modern Art (1989). Picasso and Braque: Pioneering Cubism. New York, Boston: Museum of Modern Art.  p. 36. ISBN 9780870706752

^ Rubin, William, Pablo Picasso, Georges Braque, and Museum of Modern Art (1989). Picasso and Braque: Pioneering Cubism. New York, Boston: Museum of Modern Art.  p. 30. ISBN 9780870706752

^ "Le Journal". Gallica. October 5, 1912. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015.

^ a b Journal officiel de la République française. Débats parlementaires. Chambre des députés, 3 Décembre 1912, pp. 2924–2929. Bibliothèque et Archives de l'Assemblée nationale, 2012–7516 Archived 2015-09-04 at the Wayback Machine. ISSN 1270-5942

^ Patrick F. Barrer: Quand l'art du XXe siècle était conçu par les inconnus, pp. 93–101, gives an account of the debate.

^ "biography". www.peterbrooke.org.uk. Archived from the original on May 22, 2013.

^ "Albert-Gleizes-œuvre". September 18, 2007. Archived from the original on 2007-09-18.

^ a b "The History and Chronology of Cubism, p. 5". Archived from the original on March 14, 2013.

^ "La Section d'Or, Numéro spécial, 9 Octobre 1912". Archived from the original on April 3, 2017.

^ Cooper, 20–27

^ a b c d e f g Robbins, Daniel (April 19, 1964). "Albert Gleizes, 1881–1953 : a retrospective exhibition". [New York : Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation] – via Internet Archive.

^ Louis Chassevent, Les Artistes Indépendants, 1906, Quelques Petits Salons. Paris, 1908. Chassevent discussed Delaunay and Metzinger in terms of Signac's influence, referring to Metzinger's "precision in the cut of his cubes..."

^ a b Robert Herbert, Neo-Impressionism, The Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, New York, 1968

^ A. Gleizes and J. Metzinger. Du "Cubisme", Edition Figuière, Paris, 1912 (Eng. trans., London, 1913)

^ "Mercure de France : série moderne / directeur Alfred Vallette". Gallica. December 1, 1912. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015.

^ a b Cottington, David (April 19, 2004). Cubism and Its Histories. Manchester University Press. ISBN 9780719050046. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016 – via Google Books.

^ Christopher Green, Cubism and Its Enemies: Modern Movements and Reaction in French Art, 1916–1928 Archived 2016-01-01 at the Wayback Machine, Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 1987, ISBN 0300034687

^ "The Museum of Modern Art". Moma.org. Retrieved 2011-06-11.

^ Kolokytha, Chara; Hammond, J.M.; Vlčková, Lucie. "Cubism". Routledge Encyclopedia of Modernism.

^ Archive, Asia Art. "Cubism in Asia: Unbounded Dialogues – Report". aaa.org.hk. Retrieved 2018-12-22.

^ Gris, Juan. "Portrait of Pablo Picasso". The Art Institute of Chicago. Retrieved 2021-06-07.

^ Pablo Picasso, 1909–10, Head of a Woman, bronze, published in Umělecký Mĕsíčník, 1913 Archived 2014-03-03 at the Wayback Machine, Blue Mountain Project, Princeton University

^ Robert Rosenblum, "Cubism", Readings in Art History 2 (1976), Seuphor, Sculpture of this Century

^ Balas, Edith (April 19, 1998). Joseph Csáky: A Pioneer of Modern Sculpture. American Philosophical Society. ISBN 9780871692306. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016 – via Google Books.

^ a b Architecture and cubism. Centre canadien d'architecture/Canadian Centre for Architecture : MIT Press. April 19, 2002. OCLC 915987228 – via Open WorldCat.

^ a b c "The Collection | MoMA". The Museum of Modern Art. Archived from the original on April 5, 2012.

^ P. R. Banham. Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (London, 1960), p. 203

^ Choay, Françoise, le corbusier (1960), pp. 10–11. George Braziller, Inc. ISBN 0-8076-0104-7

^ "Albert Gleizes and Jean Metzinge, except from Du Cubisme, 1912" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on June 2, 2013.

^ La Maison Cubiste, 1912 Archived 2013-03-13 at the Wayback Machine

^ Kubistische werken op de Armory Show Archived 2013-03-13 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Detail of Duchamp-Villon's Façade architecturale, 1913, from the Walt Kuhn Family papers and Armory Show records, 1859–1984, bulk 1900–1949". www.aaa.si.edu. Archived from the original on March 14, 2013.

^ "Catalogue of international exhibition of modern art: at the Armory of the Sixty-ninth Infantry". Association of American Painters and Sculptors. April 19, 1913 – via Internet Archive.

^ Green, Christopher (January 1, 2000). Art in France, 1900–1940. Yale University Press. ISBN 0300099088. Archived from the original on November 30, 2016 – via Google Books.

^ Green, Christopher (2000). Joseph Csaky's staircase in the home of Jacques Doucet. Yale University Press. ISBN 0300099088. Archived from the original on 30 April 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2012.

^ Rex, Aestheticus (14 April 2011). "Jacques Doucet's Studio St. James at Neuilly-sur-Seine". Aestheticusrex.blogspot.com.es. Archived from the original on 27 March 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2012.

^ Imbert, Dorothée (1993). The Modernist Garden in France, Dorothée Imbert, 1993, Yale University Press. Yale University Press. ISBN 0300047169. Archived from the original on 30 April 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2012.

^ Balas, Edith (1998). Joseph Csáky: A Pioneer of Modern Sculpture, Edith Balas, 1998, p. 5. American Philosophical Society. ISBN 9780871692306. Archived from the original on 30 April 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2012.

^ a b Boněk, Jan (2014). Cubist Prague. Prague: Eminent. p. 9. ISBN 978-80-7281-469-5.

^ "Cubism". www.czechtourism.com. CzechTourism. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 1 September 2015.

^ "Cubist architecture". www.radio.cz. Radio Prague. Archived from the original on 11 September 2015. Retrieved 1 September 2015.

^ a b c "Czech Cubism". www.kubista.cz. Kubista. Archived from the original on 8 October 2015. Retrieved 1 September 2015.

^ Rexroth, Kenneth. "The Cubist Poetry of Pierre Reverdy (Rexroth)". Bopsecrets.org. Archived from the original on 2011-05-19. Retrieved 2011-06-11.

^ Reverdy, Pierre. "Title Page > Pierre Reverdy: Selected Poems". Bloodaxe Books. Archived from the original on 2011-05-27. Retrieved 2011-06-11.

^ "Untitled Document". Archived from the original on 2007-08-13. Retrieved 2008-04-07.

^ Kramer, Hilton (March 24, 1973). "Picasso's Cubist Images Still Dominate 'Parade'". The New York Times. Retrieved May 13, 2024.

^ de Souza, Isabella. "Setting the Stage: Pablo Picasso's Foray Into Ballet". Myartbroker.com.

^ Unknown. "The Ballets".

^ Milliard, Coline (June 13, 2014). "Is Braque Finally Coming Out of Picasso's Shadow?".

^ "Juan Gris".

^ Lesso, Rosie (July 11, 2021). "Sumptuous Indulgence: Diaghilev and Juan Gris".

^ Heller, S., & Fili, L. (1994). Dutch Moderne: Graphic Design from De Stijl to Deco. Chronicle Books. p. 104. ISBN 0811803031.

^ Heller, S., & Fili, L. (1998). British Modern: Graphic Design Between the Wars. Chronicle Books. p. 18. ISBN 0811813118.

^ Martin, R., & Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York, N.Y.). (1998). Cubism and Fashion. Metropolitan Museum of Art: Distributed by H.N. Abrams. pp. 15–17, 42, 47. ISBN 9780870998881.

^ Berger, John. (1965). The Success and Failure of Picasso. Penguin Books, Ltd. p. 73. ISBN 978-0-679-73725-4.

^ "L'Abondance (Abundance) | Kunstmuseum Den Haag". www.kunstmuseum.nl. 2019-03-28. Retrieved 2025-03-11.

Further reading

Alfred H. Barr Jr., Cubism and Abstract Art, New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1936.
Cauman, John (2001). Inheriting Cubism: The Impact of Cubism on American Art, 1909–1936. New York: Hollis Taggart Galleries. ISBN 0-9705723-4-4.
Cooper, Douglas (1970). The Cubist Epoch. London: Phaidon in association with the Los Angeles County Museum of Art & the Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 0-87587-041-4.
Paolo Vincenzo Genovese, Cubismo in architettura, Mancosu Editore, Roma, 2010. In Italian.
John Golding, Cubism: A History and an Analysis, 1907-1914, New York: Wittenborn, 1959.
Richardson, John. A Life Of Picasso, The Cubist Rebel 1907–1916. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1991. ISBN 978-0-307-26665-1
Mark Antliff and Patricia Leighten, A Cubism Reader, Documents and Criticism, 1906–1914, The University of Chicago Press, 2008
Christopher Green, Cubism and its Enemies, Modern Movements and Reaction in French Art, 1916–28, Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 1987
Mikhail Lifshitz, The Crisis of Ugliness: From Cubism to Pop-Art. Translated and with an Introduction by David Riff. Leiden: BRILL, 2018 (originally published in Russian by Iskusstvo, 1968)
Daniel Robbins, Sources of Cubism and Futurism, Art Journal, Vol. 41, No. 4, (Winter 1981)
Cécile Debray, Françoise Lucbert, La Section d'or, 1912-1920-1925, Musées de Châteauroux, Musée Fabre, exhibition catalogue, Éditions Cercle d'art, Paris, 2000
Ian Johnston, Preliminary Notes on Cubist Architecture in Prague, 2004

External links

Cubism, Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History, Metropolitan Museum of Art
Cubist pioneer Diego Rivera
Cubism, Agence Photographique de la Réunion des musées nationaux et du Grand Palais des Champs-Elysées (RMN)
Czech Cubist Architecture
Cubism, Guggenheim Collection Online
Index of Historic Collectors and Dealers of Cubism, Leonard A. Lauder Research Center for Modern Art, Metropolitan Museum of Art
Elizabeth Carlson, Cubist Fashion: Mainstreaming Modernism after the Armory, Winterthur Portfolio, Vol. 48, No. 1 (Spring 2014), pp. 1–28. doi:10.1086/675687

vte

Pablo Picasso
Georges Braque
Jean Metzinger
Albert Gleizes
Robert Delaunay
Juan Gris
Fernand Léger
Marcel Duchamp
Henri Le Fauconnier

Alexander Archipenko
María Blanchard
Constantin Brâncuși
Joseph Csaky
Robert Delaunay
Sonia Delaunay
Marcel Duchamp
Pierre Dumont
Raymond Duchamp-Villon
Alexandra Exter
Henri Le Fauconnier
Roger de La Fresnaye
Albert Gleizes
Natalia Goncharova
Henri Hayden
Auguste Herbin
František Kupka
Jean Lambert-Rucki
Marie Laurencin
Henri Laurens
Fernand Léger
Jacques Lipchitz
André Lhote
Jean Marchand
Louis Marcoussis
Jean Metzinger
Francis Picabia
Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes
Jeanne Rij-Rousseau
Diego Rivera
Gino Severini
Léopold Survage
Tobeen
Henry Valensi
Georges Valmier
Jacques Villon

Giacomo Balla
Alice Bailly
Patrick Henry Bruce
Carlo Carrà
Paul Klee
Lyonel Feininger
El Lissitzky
Stanton Macdonald-Wright
August Macke
Kazimir Malevich
Franz Marc
Lyubov Popova
Diego Rivera
Morgan Russell
Alexander Rodchenko
Nadezhda Udaltsova
Marie Vassilieff
Marie Vorobieff

Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (Picasso)
Portrait of Ambroise Vollard (Picasso)
Portrait of Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler (Picasso)
The Accordionist (Picasso)
Le pigeon aux petits pois (Picasso)
La Coiffeuse (Picasso)
Le goûter (Metzinger)
La Femme au Cheval (Metzinger)
Dancer in a café (Metzinger)
L'Oiseau bleu (Metzinger)
La Femme aux Phlox (Gleizes)
Portrait of Jacques Nayral (Gleizes)
Man on a Balcony (Gleizes)
Les Baigneuses (Gleizes)
Les Joueurs de football (Gleizes)
Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (Duchamp)
The Cathedral (Katedrála) (Kupka)
The City (Léger)
Still Life with Candlestick (Léger)
Still Life with Checked Tablecloth (Gris)
Three Musicians (Picasso)

Groupe de femmes (Csaky)
Danseuse (Csaky)
Head (Csaky)

Paul Cézanne
Paul Gauguin
Gustave Courbet
Georges Seurat
Paul Signac
Maurice Princet
Esprit Jouffret
Neo-impressionism
Pointillism
Divisionism
Symbolism (arts)
Fauvism
Proto-Cubism
Chronophotography

Section d'Or
Cubo-Futurism
Cubist sculpture
Czech Cubism
Rondocubism
Die Brücke
Orphism (art)
Abstract art
Synchromism
Tubism
Futurism
Crystal Cubism
Purism
Suprematism
Dada
Constructivism
De Stijl
Art Deco
Russian Futurism
Ego-Futurism
Vorticism

Rondocubism

Du "Cubisme" (1912 book)
The Cubist Painters, Aesthetic Meditations (1913 book)
La Maison Cubiste

Louis Vauxcelles (critic)
Guillaume Apollinaire (poet, critic)
André Salmon (critic)
Max Jacob (poet)
Maurice Raynal (poet, critic)
Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler (art dealer)
Léonce Rosenberg (art dealer)
Paul Rosenberg (art dealer)
Daniel Robbins (art historian)
Gertrude Stein (art collector)
Berthe Weill (art dealer)
Wilhelm Uhde (art collector)
John Quinn (collector)
Leonard Lauder (art collector)
Douglas Cooper (art historian)
Arthur Jerome Eddy (art collector)
Pierre Reverdy (poet)
Blaise Cendrars (poet)
Armory Show
Fourth dimension in art

vte

Acmeism
Art Deco
Art Nouveau
Ashcan School
Constructivism
Cubism
Dada
Expressionism
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
Music
Fauvism
Functionalism
Bauhaus
Futurism
Imagism
Lettrism
Neoplasticism
De Stijl
Orphism
Surrealism
Symbolism
Synchromism
Tonalism

Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
Music

Bauhaus

De Stijl

Apollinaire
Barnes
Beckett
Bely 
Breton
Broch 
Bulgakov
Chekhov
Conrad
Döblin
Forster
Faulkner
Flaubert
Ford
Gide
Hamsun
Hašek
Hemingway
Hesse
Joyce
Kafka
Koestler
Lawrence
Mann
Mansfield
Marinetti
Musil
Dos Passos 
Platonov 
Porter
Proust
Stein
Svevo
Unamuno 
Woolf

Akhmatova
Aldington
Auden
Cendrars
Crane
H.D.
Desnos
Eliot
Éluard
Elytis
George
Jacob
Lorca
Lowell (Amy)
Lowell (Robert)
Mallarmé
Moore
Owen
Pessoa
Pound
Rilke
Seferis
Stevens
Thomas
Tzara
Valéry
Williams
Yeats

In Search of Lost Time (1913–1927)
The Metamorphosis (1915)
Ulysses (1922)
The Waste Land (1922)
The Magic Mountain (1924)
Mrs Dalloway (1925)
The Sun Also Rises (1926)
The Master and Margarita (1928–1940)
The Sound and the Fury (1929)

Albers
Arp
Balthus
Bellows
Boccioni
Bonnard
Brâncuși
Braque
Calder
Cassatt
Cézanne
Chagall
Chirico
Claudel
Dalí
Degas
Delaunay
Delaunay
Demuth
Dix
Doesburg
Duchamp
Dufy
Ensor
Ernst
Gauguin
Giacometti
Goncharova
Gris
Grosz
Höch
Hopper
Kahlo
Kandinsky
Kirchner
Klee
Kokoschka
Kooning
Léger
Magritte
Malevich
Manet
Marc
Matisse
Metzinger
Miró
Modigliani
Mondrian
Monet
Moore
Munch
Nolde
O'Keeffe
Picabia
Picasso
Pissarro
Ray
Redon
Renoir
Rodin
Rousseau
Schiele
Seurat
Signac
Sisley
Soutine
Steichen
Stieglitz
Toulouse-Lautrec
Van Gogh
Vuillard
Wood

Akerman 
Aldrich
Antonioni
Avery
Bergman
Bresson
Buñuel
Carné
Cassavetes
Chaplin
Clair
Cocteau
Dassin
Deren
Dovzhenko
Dreyer
Edwards
Eisenstein
Epstein
Fassbinder
Fellini
Flaherty
Ford
Fuller
Gance
Godard
Hitchcock
Hubley
Jones
Keaton
Kubrick
Kuleshov
Kurosawa
Lang
Losey
Lupino
Marker
Minnelli
Murnau
Ozu
Pabst
Pudovkin
Ray (Nicholas)
Ray (Satyajit)
Resnais
Renoir
Richardson
Rossellini
Sirk
Sjöström
Sternberg
Tarkovsky
Tati
Trnka
Truffaut
Varda
Vertov
Vigo
Welles
Wiene
Wood

Breuer
Bunshaft
Gaudí
Gropius
Guimard
Horta
Hundertwasser
Johnson
Kahn
Le Corbusier
Loos
Melnikov
Mendelsohn
Mies
Nervi
Neutra
Niemeyer
Rietveld
Saarinen
Steiner
Sullivan
Tatlin
Wright

A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte (1886)
Mont Sainte-Victoir (1887)
The Starry Night (1889)
Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907)
The Dance (1909–1910)
Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912)
Black Square (1915)
The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920)
Ballet Mécanique (1923)
Battleship Potemkin (1925)
Metropolis (1927)
Un Chien Andalou (1929)
Villa Savoye (1931)
Fallingwater (1936)
Citizen Kane (1941)
Meshes of the Afternoon (1943)

Antheil
Bartók
Berg
Berio
Boulanger
Boulez
Copland
Debussy
Dutilleux
Falla
Feldman
Górecki
Hindemith
Honegger
Ives
Janáček
Ligeti
Lutosławski
Milhaud
Nono
Partch
Russolo
Satie
Schaeffer
Schoenberg
Scriabin
Stockhausen
Strauss
Stravinsky
Szymanowski
Varèse
Villa-Lobos
Webern
Weill

Anderson
Anouilh
Artaud
Beckett
Brecht
Chekhov
Ibsen
Jarry
Kaiser
Maeterlinck
Mayakovsky
O'Casey
O'Neill
Osborne
Pirandello
Piscator
Strindberg
Toller
Wedekind
Wilder
Witkiewicz

Balanchine
Cunningham
Diaghilev
Duncan
Fokine
Fuller
Graham
Holm
Laban
Massine
Nijinsky
Shawn
Sokolow
St. Denis
Tamiris
Wiesenthal
Wigman

Don Juan (1888)
Ubu Roi (1896)
Verklärte Nacht (1899)
Pelléas et Mélisande (1902)
Salome (1905)
The Firebird (1910)
Afternoon of a Faun (1912)
The Rite of Spring (1913)
Fountain (1917)
Six Characters in Search of an Author (1921)
The Threepenny Opera (1928)
Waiting for Godot (1953)

American modernism
Armory Show
Avant-garde
Ballets Russes
Bloomsbury Group
Buddhist modernism
Classical Hollywood cinema
Degenerate art
Ecomodernism
Experimental film
Film noir
Fin de siècle
Fourth dimension in art
Fourth dimension in literature
Grosvenor School of Modern Art
Hanshinkan Modernism
High modernism
Hippie modernism
Impressionism
Music
Literature
Post-
Incoherents
International Style
Late modernism
Late modernity
List of art movements
List of avant-garde artists
List of modernist poets
Maximalism
Metamodernism
Modernity
Neo-primitivism
Neo-romanticism
New Hollywood
New Objectivity
Poetic realism
Pop Art
Pulp noir
Reactionary modernism
Remodernism
Second Viennese School
Structural film
Underground film
Vulgar modernism

Music
Literature
Post-

vte

Abstract expressionism
Art Nouveau
Art & Language
Conceptual art
Constructivism
Proto-Cubism
Cubism
Functionalism
Bauhaus
Grosvenor School
Devětsil
Divisionism
Fauvism
Impressionism
Neo-Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Color Field
Incoherents
Lyrical Abstraction
Mail art
Minimalism
Mir iskusstva
Multidimensional art
Neoplasticism
De Stijl
Neue Slowenische Kunst
Nonconformism
Nouveau réalisme
Orphism
Performance art
Pop art
Process art
Purism
Rayonism
Suprematism
Temporary art
Vorticism

Bauhaus

De Stijl

Acmeism
Angry Penguins
Asemic writing
Conceptual poetry
Cyberpunk
Ego-Futurism
Experimental literature
Flarf poetry
Hungry generation
Imaginism
Imagism
Language poets
Neoavanguardia
Neoteric
Nouveau roman
Oberiu
Oulipo
Slam poetry
Ultraísmo
Visual poetry
Zaum

Funk
Jazz
Free funk
Yass
Pop
Rock
Prog
Punk
Metal

Free funk
Yass

Prog
Punk
Metal

Aleatoric music
Ars nova
Ars subtilior
Atonal music
Electroacoustic music
Electronic music
Industrial music
Experimental pop
Free jazz
Free improvisation
Futurism
Microtonal music
Minimal music
Drone music
Music theatre
Musique concrète
New Complexity
No wave
Noise music
Post-rock
Rock in Opposition
Second Viennese School
Serialism
Spectral music
Stochastic music
Textural music
Totalism
Twelve-tone technique

Industrial music

Free improvisation

Drone music

Cinéma pur
Dogme 95
Drop Art
Epic theatre
Experimental film
Experimental theatre
Modernist film
Poetic realism
Postdramatic theatre
Remodernist film
Structural film
Theatre of the Absurd
Theatre of Cruelty

Constructivism
Dada
Expressionism
Fluxus
Futurism
Russian Futurism
Cubo-Futurism
Lettrism
Modernism
Minimalism
Postminimalism
Neo-minimalism
Neo-Dada
Neoism
Postmodernism
Postmodernist film
Late modernism
Primitivism
Situationist International
Social realism
Socialist realism
Surrealism
Symbolism
Russian symbolism

Russian Futurism
Cubo-Futurism

Cubo-Futurism

Postmodernist film

Russian symbolism

vte

Thracian
Dacian
Nuragic
Aegean
Cycladic
Minoan
Minyan ware
Mycenaean
Greek
Sub-Mycenaean
Protogeometric
Geometric
Orientalizing
Archaic
Black-figure
Red-figure
Severe style
Classical
Kerch style
Hellenistic
"Baroque"
Indo-Greek
Greco-Buddhist
Neo-Attic
Etruscan
Scythian
Iberian
Gaulish
Roman
Republican
Gallo-Roman
Julio-Claudian
Pompeian Styles
Trajanic
Severan

Dacian

Cycladic
Minoan
Minyan ware
Mycenaean

Sub-Mycenaean
Protogeometric
Geometric
Orientalizing
Archaic
Black-figure
Red-figure
Severe style
Classical
Kerch style
Hellenistic
"Baroque"
Indo-Greek
Greco-Buddhist
Neo-Attic

"Baroque"
Indo-Greek
Greco-Buddhist
Neo-Attic

Greco-Buddhist

Republican
Gallo-Roman
Julio-Claudian
Pompeian Styles
Trajanic
Severan

Late antique
Early Christian
Coptic
Ethiopian
Migration Period
Anglo-Saxon
Hunnic
Insular
Lombard
Visigothic
Donor portrait
Pictish
Mozarabic
Repoblación
Viking
Byzantine
Iconoclast
Macedonian
Palaeologan
Italo-Byzantine
Frankish
Merovingian
Carolingian
Pre-Romanesque
Ottonian
Romanesque
Mosan
Spanish
Norman
Norman-Sicilian
Opus Anglicanum
Gothic
Gothic art in Milan
International Gothic
International Gothic art in Italy
Lucchese school
Crusades
Moscow school
Novgorod school
Duecento
Sienese school
Mudéjar
Medieval cartography
Italian school
Majorcan school
Mappa mundi

Early Christian

Ethiopian

Anglo-Saxon
Hunnic
Insular
Lombard
Visigothic

Repoblación

Iconoclast
Macedonian
Palaeologan
Italo-Byzantine

Merovingian
Carolingian
Pre-Romanesque

Mosan
Spanish

Norman-Sicilian

Gothic art in Milan
International Gothic
International Gothic art in Italy

Sienese school

Italian school
Majorcan school
Mappa mundi

Italian Renaissance
Trecento
Proto-Renaissance
Florentine school
Pittura infamante
Quattrocento
Ferrarese school
Forlivese school
Venetian school
Cinquecento
High Renaissance
Bolognese school
Mannerism
Counter-Maniera
Northern Renaissance
Early Netherlandish
World landscape
Ghent–Bruges school
Northern Mannerism
German Renaissance
Cologne school
Danube school
Dutch and Flemish Renaissance
Antwerp Mannerism
Romanism
Still life
English Renaissance
Tudor court
Cretan school
Turquerie
Fontainebleau school
Art of the late 16th century in Milan

Trecento
Proto-Renaissance
Florentine school
Pittura infamante
Quattrocento
Ferrarese school
Forlivese school
Venetian school
Cinquecento
High Renaissance
Bolognese school
Mannerism
Counter-Maniera

Proto-Renaissance
Florentine school
Pittura infamante

Ferrarese school
Forlivese school
Venetian school

High Renaissance
Bolognese school
Mannerism
Counter-Maniera

Early Netherlandish
World landscape
Ghent–Bruges school
Northern Mannerism
German Renaissance
Cologne school
Danube school
Dutch and Flemish Renaissance
Antwerp Mannerism
Romanism
Still life

World landscape

Cologne school
Danube school

Antwerp Mannerism
Romanism
Still life

Tudor court

Baroque
Baroque in Milan
Flemish Baroque
Caravaggisti
in Utrecht
Tenebrism
Louis XIII style
Lutheran Baroque
Stroganov school
Animal painting
Guild of Romanists
Dutch Golden Age
Delft school
Capriccio
Heptanese school
Classicism
Louis XIV style
Poussinists and Rubenists

Baroque in Milan
Flemish Baroque
Caravaggisti
in Utrecht
Tenebrism
Louis XIII style
Lutheran Baroque

in Utrecht
Tenebrism

Delft school

Louis XIV style
Poussinists and Rubenists

Rococo
Rocaille
Louis XV style
Frederician
Chinoiserie
Fête galante
Neoclassicism
Goût grec
Louis XVI style
Adam style
Directoire style
Neoclassical architecture in Milan
Picturesque

Rocaille
Louis XV style
Frederician
Chinoiserie
Fête galante

Goût grec
Louis XVI style
Adam style
Directoire style
Neoclassical architecture in Milan

Art of the African diaspora
African-American
Caribbean
Haitian
Colonial Asian art
Arts in the Philippines
Letras y figuras
Tipos del País
Colonial Asian Baroque
Company style
Latin American art
Casta painting
Indochristian art
Chilote school
Cuzco school
Quito school
Latin American Baroque

African-American
Caribbean
Haitian

Haitian

Arts in the Philippines
Letras y figuras
Tipos del País
Colonial Asian Baroque
Company style

Letras y figuras
Tipos del País

Casta painting
Indochristian art
Chilote school
Cuzco school
Quito school
Latin American Baroque

Chilote school
Cuzco school
Quito school

Islamic
Moorish
Manichaean
Mughal
Qajar
Qing handicrafts
Western influence in Japan
Akita ranga
Uki-e

Moorish

Akita ranga
Uki-e

Romanticism
Fairy painting
Danish Golden Age
Troubadour style
Nazarene movement
Purismo
Shoreham Ancients
Düsseldorf school
Pre-Raphaelites
Hudson River School
American luminism
Orientalism
Norwich school
Empire style
Historicism
Revivalism
Biedermeier
Realism
Barbizon school
Costumbrismo
Verismo
Macchiaioli
Academic art
Munich school
in Greece
Neo-Grec
Etching revival

Fairy painting
Danish Golden Age
Troubadour style
Nazarene movement
Purismo
Shoreham Ancients
Düsseldorf school
Pre-Raphaelites
Hudson River School
American luminism

American luminism

Revivalism

Barbizon school
Costumbrismo
Verismo
Macchiaioli

Macchiaioli

Munich school
in Greece
Neo-Grec

in Greece

Neo-romanticism
National romanticism
Yōga
Nihonga
Japonisme
Anglo-Japanese style
Beuron school
Hague school
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
American
Hoosier Group
Boston school
Amsterdam
Canadian
Heidelberg school
Aestheticism
Arts and Crafts
Art pottery
Tonalism
Decadent movement
Symbolism
Romanian
Russian
Volcano school
Incoherents
Post-Impressionism
Neo-Impressionism
Luminism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Pont-Aven School
Cloisonnism
Synthetism
Les Nabis
American Barbizon school
California tonalism
Costumbrismo

National romanticism

Anglo-Japanese style

American
Hoosier Group
Boston school
Amsterdam
Canadian
Heidelberg school

Hoosier Group
Boston school

Art pottery

Romanian
Russian

Neo-Impressionism
Luminism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Pont-Aven School
Cloisonnism
Synthetism
Les Nabis

Luminism

California tonalism

Art Nouveau
Art Nouveau in Milan
Primitivism
California Impressionism
Secessionism
School of Paris
Munich Secession
Vienna Secession
Berlin Secession
Sonderbund
Pennsylvania Impressionism
Mir iskusstva
Ten American Painters
Fauvism
Expressionism
Die Brücke
Der Blaue Reiter
Noucentisme
Deutscher Werkbund
American Realism
Ashcan school
Cubism
Proto-Cubism
Orphism
A Nyolcak
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Futurism
Cubo-Futurism
Art Deco
Metaphysical
Rayonism
Productivism
Synchromism
Vorticism

Art Nouveau in Milan

Munich Secession
Vienna Secession
Berlin Secession
Sonderbund

Die Brücke
Der Blaue Reiter

Ashcan school

Proto-Cubism
Orphism

Cubo-Futurism

Sosaku-hanga
Suprematism
School of Paris
Crystal Cubism
Constructivism
Latin American
Universal Constructivism
Dada
Shin-hanga
Neoplasticism
De Stijl
Purism
Return to order
Novecento Italiano
Figurative Constructivism
Stupid
Cologne Progressives
Arbeitsrat für Kunst
November Group
Australian tonalism
Dresden Secession
Social realism
Functionalism
Bauhaus
Kinetic art
Anthropophagy
Mingei
Group of Seven
New Objectivity
Grosvenor school
Neues Sehen
Surrealism
Iranian
Latin American
Mexican muralism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Aeropittura
Asso
Scuola Romana
Cercle et Carré
The Group
Harlem Renaissance
Kapists
Regionalism
California Scene Painting
Heroic realism
Socialist realism
Nazi art
Streamline Moderne
Concrete art
Abstraction-Création
Tiki
The Ten
Dimensionism
Boston Expressionism
Leningrad school

Latin American
Universal Constructivism

Universal Constructivism

De Stijl

Novecento Italiano

Stupid
Cologne Progressives

November Group

Bauhaus

Iranian
Latin American

California Scene Painting

Socialist realism
Nazi art

Abstraction-Création

International Typographic Style
Abstract expressionism
Washington Color School
Visionary art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Spatialism
Color field
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
Arte Informale
COBRA
Nuagisme
Generación de la Ruptura
Jikken Kōbō
Metcalf Chateau
Mono-ha
Nanyang Style
Action painting
American Figurative Expressionism
in New York
New media art
New York school
Hard-edge painting
Bay Area Figurative Movement
Les Plasticiens
Gutai Art Association
Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai
Pop art
Situationist International
Soviet Nonconformist
Ukrainian underground
Lettrism
Letterist International
Ultra-Lettrist
Florida Highwaymen
Cybernetic art
Antipodeans

Washington Color School

Vienna School of Fantastic Realism

Tachisme
Arte Informale
COBRA
Nuagisme

in New York

Ukrainian underground

Letterist International
Ultra-Lettrist

Otra Figuración
Afrofuturism
Nueva Presencia
ZERO
Happening
Neo-Dada
Neo-Dada Organizers
Op art
Nouveau réalisme
Nouvelle tendance
Capitalist realism
Art & Language
Arte Povera
Black Arts Movement
The Caribbean Artists Movement
Chicano art movement
Conceptual art
Land art
Systems art
Video art
Minimalism
Fluxus
Generative art
Post-painterly abstraction
Intermedia
Psychedelic art
Nut Art
Photorealism
Environmental art
Performance art
Process art
Institutional critique
Light and Space
Street art
Feminist art movement
in the US
Saqqakhaneh movement
The Stars Art Group
Tropicália
Yoru no Kai
Artificial intelligence art

Neo-Dada Organizers

in the US

Post-conceptual art
Installation art
Artscene
Postminimalism
Endurance art
Sots Art
Moscow Conceptualists
Pattern and Decoration
Pliontanism
Punk art
Neo-expressionism
Transavantgarde
Saint Soleil school
Guerrilla art
Lowbrow art
Telematic art
Appropriation art
Neo-conceptual art
New European Painting
Tunisian collaborative painting
Memphis Group
Cyberdelic
Neue Slowenische Kunst
Scratch video
Transgressive
Retrofuturism
Young British Artists
Superfiction
Taring Padi
Superflat
New Leipzig school
Artist-run initiative
Artivism
The Designers Republic
Grunge design
Verdadism
Chinese Apartment Art

Moscow Conceptualists

Transavantgarde

Amazonian pop art
Altermodern
Art for art
Art game
Art intervention
Brandalism
Classical Realism
Contemporary African art
Africanfuturism
Contemporary Indigenous Australian art
Crypto art
Cyborg art
Excessivism
Fictive art
Flat design
Corporate Memphis
Hypermodernism
Hyperrealism
Idea art
Internet art
Post-Internet
iPhone art
Kitsch movement
Lightpainting
Massurrealism
Modern European ink painting
Neo-futurism
Neomodern
Neosymbolism
Passionism
Post-YBAs
Relational art
Skeuomorphism
Software art
Sound art
Stuckism
Superflat
SoFlo Superflat
Superstroke
Toyism
Unilalianism
Vaporwave
Walking Artists Network

Africanfuturism

Corporate Memphis

Post-Internet

SoFlo Superflat
Superstroke

History of art
Abstract art
Asemic writing
Anti-art
Avant-garde
Ballets Russes
Christian art
Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation
Catholic art
Icon
Lutheran art
Digital art
Fantastic art
Folk art
Hierarchy of genres
Genre painting
History painting
Illuminated manuscript
Illustration
Interactive art
Jewish art
Kitsch
Landscape painting
Modernism
Modern sculpture
Late modernism
Naïve art
Outsider art
Portrait
Prehistoric European art
Queer art
Realism
Shock art
Trompe-l'œil
Western painting

Asemic writing

Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation
Catholic art
Icon
Lutheran art

Genre painting
History painting

Modern sculpture
Late modernism

Category

vte

Blue (1901–1904)
Rose (1904–1906)
African (1907–1909)
Cubism (1910–1919)

1889–1900
1901–1910
1911–1920
1921–1930
1931–1940
1941–1950
1951–1960
1961–1970
1971–1973
Picasso's written works

Le petit picador jaune (1889)
Science and Charity (1897)
Le Moulin de la Galette (1900)
The Appointment (1901)
Child with a Dove (1901)
La Gommeuse (1901)
Yo, Picasso (1901)
Portrait of Jaime Sabartés (1901)
The Blue Room (1901)
Femme aux Bras Croisés (1901–1902)
Old Jewish Man with a Boy (1903)
The Old Guitarist (1903)
La Vie (1903)
Portrait of Angel Fernández de Soto (1903)
Portrait of Suzanne Bloch (1904)
The Actor (1904–1905)
Woman Ironing (1904)
Girl in a Chemise (c. 1905)
Acrobat and Young Harlequin (1905)
Family of Saltimbanques (1905)
Garçon à la pipe (1905)
Girl on a Ball (1905)
Les Noces de Pierrette (1905)
Au Lapin Agile (1905)
Young Girl with a Flower Basket (1905)
Famille d'acrobates avec singe (1905)
Boy Leading a Horse (1905–1906)
Portrait of Gertrude Stein (1905–1906)
Head of a Young Woman (1906)
Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907)
Woman with a Fan (1908)
Brick Factory at Tortosa (1909)
Woman with a Fan (1909)
Femme et pot de moutarde (1910)
Girl with a Mandolin (1910)
Portrait of Ambroise Vollard (1910)
Portrait of Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler (1910)
The Accordionist (1911)
Le pigeon aux petits pois (1911)
La Coiffeuse (1911)
Violon et Raisins (1912)
Bottle, Glass, Fork (1912)
Ma Jolie (1912)
Still Life with Chair Caning (1912)
Arlequin (1913)
Ma Jolie (1914)
Three Musicians (1921)
Reading the Letter (c. 1921)
The Pipes of Pan (1923)
The Three Dancers (1925)
Woman in a Red Armchair (1929)
Le Repos (1932)
Girl before a Mirror (1932)
La Lecture (1932)
Le Rêve (1932)
Nude, Green Leaves and Bust (1932)
Nude in a Black Armchair (1932)
Femme à la montre (1932)
Two Girls Reading (1934)
Jeune Fille Endormie (1935)
Guernica (1937)
Portrait of Dora Maar (1937)
Woman in Hat and Fur Collar (1937)
The Weeping Woman (1937)
Girl with a Red Beret and Pompom (1937)
Femme au béret et à la robe quadrillée (Marie-Thérèse Walter) (1937)
Maya with Doll (1938)
Woman's Head (1939)
Dora Maar au Chat (1941)
The Charnel House (1944–1945)
Nature morte au poron (1948)
Massacre in Korea (1951)
Les Femmes d'Alger series (1955)
Las Meninas (1957)
The Fall of Icarus (1958)
Bust of a Seated Woman (Jacqueline Roque) (1960)
Jacqueline (1961)
Femme au Chien (1962)

Bust of a Woman (Marie-Thérèse) (1931)
Tête de femme (Dora Maar) (1941)
Bull's Head (1942)
Baboon and Young (1951)
Figure découpée (1963, 1964, 1965)
Chicago Picasso (1967)
Sylvette (1970)

Vollard Suite (1930–1937)
Minotaur Kneeling over Sleeping Girl (1933)
Minotauromachy (1935)
The Dream and Lie of Franco (1937)
347 Series (1968)

Girl from Majorca (1905)
Don Quixote (1955)
Toros y toreros (1961)

Le Taureau (1945–1946)
Dove (1949)

Regjeringskvartalet murals

Desire Caught by the Tail (c. 1941)
The Four Little Girls (c. 1947–1948)

Picasso's written works

Picasso and the Ballets Russes
Parade
The Three-Cornered Hat
Pulcinella
Le Train Bleu
Mercure

Parade
The Three-Cornered Hat
Pulcinella
Le Train Bleu

Musée Picasso (Paris)
Musée Picasso (Antibes)
Museu Picasso (Barcelona)
Museo Picasso Málaga (Malaga)
Museo Casa Natal (Malaga)
Château de Boisgeloup (Normandy)

Fernande Olivier
Marie-Thérèse Walter
Dora Maar
Françoise Gilot
Geneviève Laporte

Olga Khokhlova (first wife)
Jacqueline Roque (second wife)
Maya Widmaier-Picasso (daughter)
Claude Picasso (son)
Paloma Picasso (daughter)
Diana Widmaier Picasso (granddaughter)
Marina Picasso (granddaughter)
Bernard Ruiz-Picasso (grandson)
José Ruiz y Blasco (father)

Bateau-Lavoir (Montmartre Paris)
Villa La Vigie (Juan-les-Pins, Summer 1924)
Château de Boisgeloup (Gisors, 1930–1937)
Château of Vauvenargues (Vauvenargues, 1958–1962)
Villa La Californie (Cannes, 1955–1961)
Château de Vie (Mougins, 1961–1973)

Visit to Picasso (1949)
Guernica (1950)
The Mystery of Picasso (1956)
The Adventures of Picasso (1978)
Surviving Picasso (1996)
Picasso: Magic, Sex & Death (2001)
Modigliani (2004)
Genius (2018 TV series)

Carles Casagemas
Carl Nesjar
Lydia Corbett
Lump (dog)
Fundación Picasso
Picasso. In the heart of darkness (1939–1945) (2019–2020 exhibition)
Picasso & Lump (2006 book)
Picasso referendum of Basel
Theft of The Weeping Woman from the National Gallery of Victoria
Portrait of Pablo Picasso (1915 painting)
"If I Told Him: A Completed Portrait of Picasso" (1924 poem)
The Picasso Summer (1969 film)
Woman, Bird, Star (Homage to Pablo Picasso) (1973 painting)
"Pablo Picasso" (1976 song)
The Blue Guitar (1977 etchings)
Picasso at the Lapin Agile (1993 play)
Picasso (crater)

vte

Seascape. L'Estaque (1906)
The Viaduct at L'Estaque (1907)
Houses at l'Estaque (1908)
Fruit Dish (1908–09)
Fishing Boats (1909)
Mandora (1909–10)
Pitcher and Violin (1909–10)
Woman with a Mandolin (1910)
Still Life (1911)
The Guitar (1912)
Concert (1937)
The Birds (1952–1953)

Fruit Dish and Glass (1912)

Cubism

vte

List of works
Two Nudes in an Exotic Landscape (1905–06)
Coucher de soleil no. 1 (c. 1906)
Woman with a Hat (c. 1906)
La danse, Bacchante (c. 1906)
Colored Landscape with Aquatic Birds (c. 1907)
Bathers (c. 1908)
Nu à la cheminée (1910)
Two Nudes (1910–11)
Tea Time (1911)
Woman with a Horse (1911–12)
Man with a Pipe (Portrait of an American Smoker) (1911–12)
The Harbor (1911–12)
Nature morte (Compotier et cruche décorée de cerfs) (1911–12)
Dancer in a Café (1912)
Woman with a Fan (1912)
Au Vélodrome (1912)
The Blue Bird (1912–13)
Woman with a Fan (c. 1913)
En Canot (1913)
Man with Pipe (1913)
Soldier at a Game of Chess (1914–15)
Lady at her Dressing Table (1916)
Fruit and a Jug on a Table (1916)

Du "Cubisme" (1912)

Man in a Hammock (1913 painting)

vte

List of works
The Banks of the Marne (1909)
The Tree (1910)
Woman with Phlox (1910)
The Hunt (1911)
Portrait of Jacques Nayral (1911)
Le Chemin, Paysage à Meudon (1911)
Man on a Balcony (1912)
The Bathers (1912)
Harvest Threshing (1912)
Passy, Bridges of Paris (1912)
Football Players (1912–13)
Man in a Hammock (1913)
The Publisher Eugène Figuière (1913)
Cubist Landscape (1914)
Woman with Animals (1914)
Portrait of an Army Doctor (1914–15)
Composition for "Jazz" (1915)
Brooklyn Bridge (1915)
Woman with Black Glove (1920)

Du "Cubisme" (1912)
Painting and its Laws (1924)

Juliette Roche (wife)
Cubism

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF data

Tier 1: 64-bit Linux, macOS; 64- and 32-bit Windows 10+[5]
Tier 2: E.g. 32-bit WebAssembly (WASI)
Tier 3: 64-bit Android,[6] iOS, FreeBSD, and (32-bit) Raspberry Pi OSUnofficial (or has been known to work): Other Unix-like/BSD variants) and a few other platforms[7][8][9]

Python Programming at Wikibooks

Python is a high-level, general-purpose programming language. Its design philosophy emphasizes code readability with the use of significant indentation.[33]

Python is dynamically type-checked and garbage-collected. It supports multiple programming paradigms, including structured (particularly procedural), object-oriented and functional programming. It is often described as a "batteries included" language due to its comprehensive standard library.[34][35]

Guido van Rossum began working on Python in the late 1980s as a successor to the ABC programming language, and he first released it in 1991 as Python 0.9.0.[36] Python 2.0 was released in 2000. Python 3.0, released in 2008, was a major revision not completely backward-compatible with earlier versions. Python 2.7.18, released in 2020, was the last release of Python 2.[37]

Python consistently ranks as one of the most popular programming languages, and it has gained widespread use in the machine learning community.[38][39][40][41]

History

Python was conceived in the late 1980s[42] by Guido van Rossum at Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI) in the Netherlands; it was conceived as a successor to the ABC programming language, which was inspired by SETL,[43] capable of exception handling and interfacing with the Amoeba operating system.[12] Python implementation began in December 1989.[44] Van Rossum assumed sole responsibility for the project, as the lead developer, until 12 July 2018, when he announced his "permanent vacation" from responsibilities as Python's "benevolent dictator for life" (BDFL); this title was bestowed on him by the Python community to reflect his long-term commitment as the project's chief decision-maker.[45] (He has since come out of retirement and is self-titled "BDFL-emeritus".) In January 2019, active Python core developers elected a five-member Steering Council to lead the project.[46][47]

The name Python is said to derive from the British comedy series Monty Python's Flying Circus.[48]

Python 2.0 was released on 16 October 2000, with many major new features such as list comprehensions, cycle-detecting garbage collection, reference counting, and Unicode support.[49] Python 2.7's end-of-life was initially set for 2015, and then postponed to 2020 out of concern that a large body of existing code could not easily be forward-ported to Python 3.[50][51] It no longer receives security patches or updates.[52][53] While Python 2.7 and older versions are officially unsupported, a different unofficial Python implementation, PyPy, continues to support Python 2, i.e., "2.7.18+" (plus 3.10), with the plus signifying (at least some) "backported security updates".[54]

Python 3.0 was released on 3 December 2008, with some new semantics and changed syntax. At least every Python release since (the now unsupported) 3.5 has added some syntax to the language; a few later releases have removed outdated modules and have changed semantics, at least in a minor way.

As of 8 April 2025[update], Python 3.13.3 is the latest stable release (it's highly recommended to upgrade to it, or upgrade any other older 3.x release). This version currently receives full bug-fix and security updates, while Python 3.12—released in October 2023—had active bug-fix support only until April 2025, and since then only security fixes. Python 3.9[55] is the oldest supported version of Python (albeit in the 'security support' phase), because Python 3.8 has become an end-of-life product.[56][57] Starting with Python 3.13, it and later versions receive two years of full support (which has increased from one and a half years), followed by three years of security support; this is the same total duration of support as previously.

Security updates were expedited in 2021 and again twice in 2022. More issues were fixed in 2023 and in September 2024 (for Python versions 3.8.20 through 3.12.6)—all versions (including 2.7)[58] had been insecure because of issues leading to possible remote code execution[59] and web-cache poisoning.[60]

Python 3.10 added the | union type operator[61] and the match and case keywords (for structural pattern matching statements). Python 3.11 expanded exception handling functionality. Python 3.12 added the new keyword type. Notable changes from version 3.10 to 3.11 include increased program execution speed and improved error reporting.[62] Python 3.11 is claimed to be 10–60% faster than Python 3.10, and Python 3.12 increases by an additional 5%. Python 3.12 also includes improved error messages (again improved in 3.14) and many other changes.

Python 3.13 introduces more syntax for types; a new and improved interactive interpreter (REPL), featuring multi-line editing and color support; an incremental garbage collector, which results in shorter pauses for collection in programs that have many objects, as well as increasing the improved speed in 3.11 and 3.12);  an experimental just-in-time (JIT) compiler (such features, can/needs to be enabled specifically for the increase in speed);[63] and an experimental free-threaded build mode, which disables the global interpreter lock (GIL), allowing threads to run more concurrently, as enabled inpython3.13t or python3.13t.exe.

Python 3.13 introduces some changes in behavior, i.e., new "well-defined semantics", fixing bugs, and removing many deprecated classes, functions and methods (as well as some of the Python/C API and outdated modules). "The  old implementation of locals() and frame.f_locals was slow, inconsistent and buggy,  and it had many corner cases and oddities. Code that works around those may need revising; code that uses locals() for simple templating or print debugging should continue to work correctly."[64]

Python 3.13 introduces the experimental free-threaded build mode, which disables the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL); the GIL is a feature of CPython that previously prevented multiple threads from executing Python bytecode simultaneously. This optional build, introduced through PEP 703, enables better exploitation of multi-core CPUs. By allowing multiple threads to run Python code in parallel, the free-threaded mode addresses long-standing performance bottlenecks associated with the GIL. This change offers a new path for parallelism in Python, without resorting to multiprocessing or external concurrency frameworks.[65]

Some additional standard-library modules will be removed in Python 3.15 or 3.16, as will be many deprecated classes, functions and methods.[66][67]

Python 3.11 adds Sigstore digital verification signatures for all CPython artifacts (in addition to the now deprecated PGP signatures); the use of PGP has been criticized by security practitioners,  Python is transitioning to Sigstore exclusively and plans to drop PGP in version 3.14.[68]

Python 3.12 removed wstr meaning Python extensions[69] need to be modified,[70] and 3.10 added pattern matching to the language.[71]

Python 3.12 dropped some outdated modules, and more will be dropped in the future, deprecated as of 3.13; already deprecated array 'u' format code will emit DeprecationWarning since 3.13 and will be removed in Python 3.16. The 'w' format code should be used instead. Part of ctypes is also deprecated and http.server.CGIHTTPRequestHandler will emit a DeprecationWarning, and will be removed in 3.15. Using that code already has a high potential for both security and functionality bugs. Parts of the typing module are deprecated, e.g. creating a typing.NamedTuple class using keyword arguments to denote the fields and such (and more) will be disallowed in Python 3.15.

Python 3.14 is now in the alpha 3 phase. With regard to possible change to annotations, "In Python 3.14, from __future__ import annotations will continue to work as it did before, converting annotations into strings."[72]

Python Enhancement Proposal (PEP) 711 proposes PyBI—a standard format for distributing Python binaries.[73]

Python 3.15 will "Make UTF-8 mode default";[74] This mode is supported in all current Python versions, but it currently must be opted into. UTF-8 is already used by default on Windows (and other operating systems) for most purposes; an exception is opening files. Enabling UTF-8 also makes code fully cross-platform.

Design philosophy and features

Python is a multi-paradigm programming language. Object-oriented programming and structured programming are fully supported, and many of their features support functional programming and aspect-oriented programming (including metaprogramming[75] and metaobjects).[76] Many other paradigms are supported via extensions, including design by contract[77][78] and logic programming.[79] Python is often referred to as a 'glue language'[80] because it can seamlessly integrate components written in other languages.

Python uses dynamic typing and a combination of reference counting and a cycle-detecting garbage collector for memory management.[81] It uses dynamic name resolution (late binding), which binds method and variable names during program execution.

Python's design offers some support for functional programming in the Lisp tradition. It has filter,mapandreduce functions; list comprehensions, dictionaries, sets, and generator expressions.[82] The standard library has two modules (itertools and functools) that implement functional tools borrowed from Haskell and Standard ML.[83]

Python's core philosophy is summarized in the Zen of Python (PEP 20), which includes aphorisms such as these:[84]

Beautiful is better than ugly.
Explicit is better than implicit.
Simple is better than complex.
Complex is better than complicated.
Readability counts.

However, Python features regularly violate these principles and have received criticism for adding unnecessary language bloat.[85] Responses to these criticisms note that the Zen of Python is a guideline rather than a rule.[86] The addition of some new features had been controversial: Guido van Rossum resigned as Benevolent Dictator for Life after conflict about adding the assignment expression operator in Python 3.8.[87][88]

Nevertheless, rather than building all functionality into its core, Python was designed to be highly extensible via modules. This compact modularity has made it particularly popular as a means of adding programmable interfaces to existing applications. Van Rossum's vision of a small core language with a large standard library and easily extensible interpreter stemmed from his frustrations with ABC, which represented the opposite approach.[42]

Python claims to strive for a simpler, less-cluttered syntax and grammar, while giving developers a choice in their coding methodology. In contrast to Perl's motto "there is more than one way to do it", Python advocates an approach where "there should be one—and preferably only one—obvious way to do it.".[84] In practice, however, Python provides many ways to achieve a given goal. There are, for example, at least three ways to format a string literal, with no certainty as to which one a programmer should use.[89] Alex Martelli is a Fellow at the Python Software Foundation and Python book author; he wrote that "To describe something as 'clever' is not considered a compliment in the Python culture."[90]

Python's developers usually try to avoid premature optimization; they also reject patches to non-critical parts of the CPython reference implementation that would offer marginal increases in speed at the cost of clarity.[91] Execution speed can be improved by moving speed-critical functions to extension modules written in languages such as C, or by using a just-in-time compiler like PyPy. It is also possible to cross-compile to other languages; but this approach either fails to achieve the expected speed-up, since Python is a very dynamic language, or only a restricted subset of Python is compiled (with potential minor semantic changes).[92]

Python's developers aim for the language to be fun to use. This goal is reflected in the name—a tribute to the British comedy group Monty Python[93]—and in playful approaches to some tutorials and reference materials. For instance, some code examples use the terms "spam" and "eggs" (in reference to a Monty Python sketch), rather than the typical terms "foo" and "bar".[94][95] A common neologism in the Python community is pythonic, which has a wide range of meanings related to program style. Pythonic code may use Python idioms well; be natural or show fluency in the language; or conform with Python's minimalist philosophy and emphasis on readability.[96]

Syntax and semantics

Python is meant to be an easily readable language. Its formatting is visually uncluttered and often uses English keywords where other languages use punctuation. Unlike many other languages, it does not use curly brackets to delimit blocks, and semicolons after statements are allowed but rarely used. It has fewer syntactic exceptions and special cases than C or Pascal.[97]

Indentation

Python uses whitespace indentation, rather than curly brackets or keywords, to delimit blocks. An increase in indentation comes after certain statements; a decrease in indentation signifies the end of the current block.[98] Thus, the program's visual structure accurately represents its semantic structure.[99] This feature is sometimes termed the off-side rule. Some other languages use indentation this way; but in most, indentation has no semantic meaning. The recommended indent size is four spaces.[100]

Statements and control flow

Python's statements include the following:

The assignment statement, using a single equals sign =
The if statement, which conditionally executes a block of code, along with else and elif (a contraction of else if)
The for statement, which iterates over an iterable object, capturing each element to a local variable for use by the attached block
The while statement, which executes a block of code as long as its condition is true
The try statement, which allows exceptions raised in its attached code block to be caught and handled by except clauses (or new syntax except* in Python 3.11 for exception groups[101]); the try statement also ensures that clean-up code in a finally block is always run regardless of how the block exits
The raise statement, used to raise a specified exception or re-raise a caught exception
The class statement, which executes a block of code and attaches its local namespace to a class, for use in object-oriented programming
The def statement, which defines a function or method
The with statement, which encloses a code block within a context manager, allowing resource-acquisition-is-initialization (RAII)-like behavior and replacing a common try/finally idiom[102] Examples of a context include acquiring a lock before some code is run, and then releasing the lock; or opening and then closing a file)
The break statement, which exits a loop
The continue statement, which skips the rest of the current iteration and continues with the next
The del statement, which removes a variable—deleting the reference from the name to the value, and producing an error if the variable is referred to before it is redefined [a]
The pass statement, serving as a NOP (i.e., no operation), which is syntactically needed to create an empty code block
The assert statement, used in debugging to check for conditions that should apply
The yield statement, which returns a value from a generator function (and also an operator); used to implement coroutines
The return statement, used to return a value from a function
The import and from statements, used to import modules whose functions or variables can be used in the current program
The match and case statements, analogous to a switch statement construct, which compares an expression against one or more cases as a control-flow measure.

The assignment statement (=) binds a name as a reference to a separate, dynamically allocated object. Variables may subsequently be rebound at any time to any object. In Python, a variable name is a generic reference holder without a fixed data type; however, it always refers to some object with a type. This is called dynamic typing—in contrast to statically-typed languages, where each variable may contain only a value of a certain type.

Python does not support tail call optimization or first-class continuations; according to Van Rossum, the language never will.[103][104] However, better support for coroutine-like functionality is provided by extending Python's generators.[105] Before 2.5, generators were lazy iterators; data was passed unidirectionally out of the generator. From Python 2.5 on, it is possible to pass data back into a generator function; and from version 3.3, data can be passed through multiple stack levels.[106]

Expressions

Python's expressions include the following:

The +, -, and * operators for mathematical addition, subtraction, and multiplication are similar to other languages, but the behavior of division differs. There are two types of division in Python: floor division (or integer division) //, and floating-point division /.[107] Python uses the ** operator for exponentiation.
Python uses the + operator for string concatenation. The language uses the * operator for duplicating a string a specified number of times.
The @ infix operator is intended to be used by libraries such as NumPy for matrix multiplication.[108][109]
The syntax :=, called the "walrus operator", was introduced in Python 3.8. This operator assigns values to variables as part of a larger expression.[110]
In Python, == compares two objects by value. Python's is operator may be used to compare object identities (i.e., comparison by reference), and comparisons may be chained—for example, a <= b <= c.
Python uses and, or, and not as Boolean operators.
Python has a type of expression called a list comprehension, and a more general expression called a generator expression.[82]
Anonymous functions are implemented using lambda expressions; however, there may be only one expression in each body.
Conditional expressions are written as x if c else y.[111] (This is different in operand order from the c ? x : y operator common to many other languages.)
Python makes a distinction between lists and tuples. Lists are written as [1, 2, 3], are mutable, and cannot be used as the keys of dictionaries (since dictionary keys must be immutable in Python). Tuples, written as (1, 2, 3), are immutable and thus can be used as the keys of dictionaries, provided that all of the tuple's elements are immutable. The + operator can be used to concatenate two tuples, which does not directly modify their contents, but produces a new tuple containing the elements of both. For example, given the variable t initially equal to (1, 2, 3), executing t = t + (4, 5) first evaluates t + (4, 5), which yields (1, 2, 3, 4, 5); this result is then assigned back to t—thereby effectively "modifying the contents" of t while conforming to the immutable nature of tuple objects. Parentheses are optional for tuples in unambiguous contexts.[112]
Python features sequence unpacking where multiple expressions, each evaluating to something assignable (e.g., a variable or a writable property) are associated just as in forming tuple literal; as a whole, the results are then put on the left-hand side of the equal sign in an assignment statement. This statement expects an iterable object on the right-hand side of the equal sign to produce the same number of values as the writable expressions on the left-hand side; while iterating, the statement assigns each of the values produced on the right to the corresponding expression on the left.[113]
Python has a "string format" operator % that functions analogously to printf format strings in the C language—e.g. "spam=%s eggs=%d" % ("blah", 2) evaluates to "spam=blah eggs=2". In Python 2.6+ and 3+, this operator was supplemented by the format() method of the str class, e.g., "spam={0} eggs={1}".format("blah", 2). Python 3.6 added "f-strings": spam = "blah"; eggs = 2; f'spam={spam} eggs={eggs}'.[114]
Strings in Python can be concatenated by "adding" them (using the same operator as for adding integers and floats); e.g., "spam" + "eggs" returns "spameggs". If strings contain numbers, they are concatenated as strings rather than as integers, e.g. "2" + "2" returns "22".
Python supports string literals in several ways:
Delimited by single or double quotation marks; single and double quotation marks have equivalent functionality (unlike in Unix shells, Perl, and Perl-influenced languages). Both marks use the backslash (\) as an escape character. String interpolation became available in Python 3.6 as "formatted string literals".[114]
Triple-quoted, i.e., starting and ending with three single or double quotation marks; this may span multiple lines and function like here documents in shells, Perl, and Ruby.
Raw string varieties, denoted by prefixing the string literal with r. Escape sequences are not interpreted; hence raw strings are useful where literal backslashes are common, such as in regular expressions and Windows-style paths. (Compare "@-quoting" in C#.)
Python has array index and array slicing expressions in lists, which are written as a[key], a[start:stop] or a[start:stop:step]. Indexes are zero-based, and negative indexes are relative to the end. Slices take elements from the start index up to, but not including, the stop index. The (optional) third slice parameter, called step or stride, allows elements to be skipped or reversed. Slice indexes may be omitted—for example, a[:] returns a copy of the entire list. Each element of a slice is a shallow copy.

Delimited by single or double quotation marks; single and double quotation marks have equivalent functionality (unlike in Unix shells, Perl, and Perl-influenced languages). Both marks use the backslash (\) as an escape character. String interpolation became available in Python 3.6 as "formatted string literals".[114]
Triple-quoted, i.e., starting and ending with three single or double quotation marks; this may span multiple lines and function like here documents in shells, Perl, and Ruby.
Raw string varieties, denoted by prefixing the string literal with r. Escape sequences are not interpreted; hence raw strings are useful where literal backslashes are common, such as in regular expressions and Windows-style paths. (Compare "@-quoting" in C#.)

In Python, a distinction between expressions and statements is rigidly enforced, in contrast to languages such as Common Lisp, Scheme, or Ruby. This distinction leads to duplicating some functionality, for example:

List comprehensions vs. for-loops
Conditional expressions vs. if blocks
The eval() vs. exec() built-in functions (in Python 2, exec is a statement); the former function is for expressions, while the latter is for statements

A statement cannot be part of an expression; because of this restriction, expressions such as list and dict comprehensions (and lambda expressions) cannot contain statements. As a particular case, an assignment statement such as a = 1 cannot be part of the conditional expression of a conditional statement.

Methods

Methods of objects are functions attached to the object's class; the syntax for normal methods and functions, instance.method(argument), is syntactic sugar for Class.method(instance, argument). Python methods have an explicit self parameter to access instance data, in contrast to the implicit self (or this) parameter in some object-oriented programming languages (e.g., C++, Java, Objective-C, Ruby).[115] Python also provides methods, often called dunder methods (because their names begin and end with double underscores); these methods allow user-defined classes to modify how they are handled by native operations including length, comparison, arithmetic, and type conversion.[116]

Typing

Python uses duck typing, and it has typed objects but untyped variable names. Type constraints are not checked at definition time; rather, operations on an object may fail at usage time, indicating that the object is not of an appropriate type. Despite being dynamically typed, Python is strongly typed, forbidding operations that are poorly defined (e.g., adding a number and a string) rather than quietly attempting to interpret them.

Python allows programmers to define their own types using classes, most often for object-oriented programming. New instances of classes are constructed by calling the class, for example, SpamClass() or EggsClass()); the classes are instances of the metaclass type (which is an instance of itself), thereby allowing metaprogramming and reflection.

Before version 3.0, Python had two kinds of classes, both using the same syntax: old-style and new-style.[117] Current Python versions support the semantics of only the new style.

Python supports optional type annotations.[4][118] These annotations are not enforced by the language, but may be used by external tools such as mypy to catch errors.[119][120] Mypy also supports a Python compiler called mypyc, which leverages type annotations for optimization.[121]

1.33333

Arithmetic operations

Python includes conventional symbols for arithmetic operators (+, -, *, /), the floor-division operator //, and the modulo operator %. (With the module operator, a remainder can be negative, e.g., 4 % -3 == -2.) Python also offers the ** symbol for exponentiation, e.g. 5**3 == 125 and 9**0.5 == 3.0; it also offers the matrix‑multiplication operator @ .[125] These operators work as in traditional mathematics; with the same precedence rules, the infix operators + and - can also be unary, to represent positive and negative numbers respectively.

Division between integers produces floating-point results. The behavior of division has changed significantly over time:[126]

The current version of Python (i.e., since 3.0) changed the / operator to always represent floating-point division, e.g., 5/2 == 2.5.
The floor division // operator was introduced. Thus 7//3 == 2, -7//3 == -3, 7.5//3 == 2.0, and -7.5//3 == -3.0. For outdated Python 2.7 adding the from __future__ import division statement causes a module in Python 2.7 to use Python 3.0 rules for division instead (see above).

In Python terms, the / operator represents true division (or simply division), while the // operator represents floor division. Before version 3.0, the / operator represents classic division.[126]

Rounding towards negative infinity, though a different method than in most languages, adds consistency to Python. For instance, this rounding implies that the equation (a + b)//b == a//b + 1 is always true. The rounding also implies that the equation b*(a//b) + a%b == a is valid for both positive and negative values of a. As expected, the result of a%b lies in the half-open interval [0, b), where b is a positive integer; however, maintaining the validity of the equation requires that the result must lie in the interval (b, 0] when b is negative.[127]

Python provides a round function for rounding a float to the nearest integer. For tie-breaking, Python 3 uses the round to even method: round(1.5) and round(2.5) both produce 2.[128] Python versions before 3 used the round-away-from-zero method: round(0.5) is 1.0, and round(-0.5) is −1.0.[129]

Python allows Boolean expressions that contain multiple equality relations to be consistent with general usage in mathematics. For example, the expression a < b < c tests whether a is less than b and b is less than c.[130] C-derived languages interpret this expression differently: in C, the expression would first evaluate a < b, resulting in 0 or 1, and that result would then be compared with c.[131]

Python uses arbitrary-precision arithmetic for all integer operations. The Decimal type/class in the decimal module provides decimal floating-point numbers to a pre-defined arbitrary precision with several rounding modes.[132] The Fraction class in the fractions module provides arbitrary precision for rational numbers.[133]

Due to Python's extensive mathematics library and the third-party library NumPy, the language is frequently used for scientific scripting in tasks such as numerical data processing and manipulation.[134][135]

Function syntax

Functions are created in Python by using the def keyword. A function is defined similarly to how it is called, by first providing the function name and then the required parameters. Here is an example of a function that prints its inputs:

To assign a default value to a function parameter in case no actual value is provided at run time, variable-definition syntax can be used inside the function header.

Code examples

"Hello, World!" program:

Program to calculate the factorial of a positive integer:

Libraries

Python's large standard library[136] is commonly cited as one of its greatest strengths. For Internet-facing applications, many standard formats and protocols such as MIME and HTTP are supported. The language includes modules for creating graphical user interfaces, connecting to relational databases, generating pseudorandom numbers, arithmetic with arbitrary-precision decimals,[132] manipulating regular expressions, and unit testing.

Some parts of the standard library are covered by specifications—for example, the Web Server Gateway Interface (WSGI) implementation wsgiref follows PEP 333[137]—but most parts are specified by their code, internal documentation, and test suites. However, because most of the standard library is cross-platform Python code, only a few modules must be altered or rewritten for variant implementations.

As of 13 March 2025,[update] the Python Package Index (PyPI), the official repository for third-party Python software, contains over 614,339[138] packages. These have a wide range of functionality, including the following:

Automation
Data analytics
Databases
Documentation
Graphical user interfaces
Image processing
Machine learning
Mobile apps
Multimedia
Computer networking
Scientific computing
System administration
Test frameworks
Text processing
Web frameworks
Web scraping

Development environments

Most Python implementations (including CPython) include a read–eval–print loop (REPL); this permits the environment to function as a command line interpreter, with which users enter statements sequentially and receive results immediately.

Python is also bundled with an integrated development environment (IDE) called IDLE, which is oriented toward beginners.

Other shells, including IDLE and IPython, add additional capabilities such as improved auto-completion, session-state retention, and syntax highlighting.

Standard desktop IDEs include PyCharm, IntelliJ Idea, Visual Studio Code; there are also web browser-based IDEs, such as the following environments:

SageMath, for developing science- and math-related programs;
Jupyter Notebooks, an open-source interactive computing platform;
PythonAnywhere, a browser-based IDE and hosting environment; and
Canopy IDE, a commercial IDE that emphasizes scientific computing.[139][140]

Implementations

Reference implementation

CPython is the reference implementation of Python. This implementation is written in C, meeting the C11 standard[141] (since version 3.11, older versions use the C89 standard with several select C99 features), but third-party extensions are not limited to older C versions—e.g., they can be implemented using C11 or C++.[142][143] CPython compiles Python programs into an intermediate bytecode,[144] which is then executed by a virtual machine.[145] CPython is distributed with a large standard library written in a combination of C and native Python.

CPython is available for many platforms, including Windows and most modern Unix-like systems, including macOS (and Apple M1 Macs, since Python 3.9.1, using an experimental installer). Starting with Python 3.9, the Python installer intentionally fails to install on Windows 7 and 8;[146][147] Windows XP was supported until Python 3.5, with unofficial support for VMS.[148] Platform portability was one of Python's earliest priorities.[149] During development of Python 1 and 2, even OS/2 and Solaris were supported;[150] since that time, support has been dropped for many platforms.

All current Python versions (since 3.7) support only operating systems that feature multithreading, by now supporting not nearly as many operating systems (dropping many outdated) than in the past.

Other implementations

All alternative implementations have at least slightly different semantic. For example, an alternative may include unordered dictionaries, in contrast to other current Python versions. As another example in the larger Python ecosystem, PyPy does not support the full C Python API. Alternative implementations include the following:

PyPy is a fast, compliant interpreter of Python 2.7 and  3.10.[151][152] PyPy's just-in-time compiler often improves speed significantly relative to CPython, but PyPy does not support some libraries written in C.[153] PyPy offers support for the RISC-V instruction-set architecture, for example.
Codon is an implentation with an ahead-of-time (AOT) compiler, which compiles a statically-typed Python-like language whose "syntax and semantics are nearly identical to Python's, there are some notable differences"[154] For example, Codon uses 64-bit machine integers for speed, not arbitrarily as with Python; Codon developers claim that speedups over CPython are usually on the order of ten to a hundred times. Codon compiles to machine code (via LLVM) and supports native multithreading.[155]  Codon can also compile to Python extension modules that can be imported and used from Python.
MicroPython and CircuitPython are Python 3 variants that are optimized for microcontrollers, including the Lego Mindstorms EV3.[156]
Pyston is a variant of the Python runtime that uses just-in-time compilation to speed up execution of Python programs.[157]
Cinder is a performance-oriented fork of CPython 3.8 that features a number of optimizations, including bytecode inline caching, eager evaluation of coroutines, a method-at-a-time JIT, and an experimental bytecode compiler.[158]
The Snek[159][160][161] embedded computing language "is Python-inspired, but it is not Python. It is possible to write Snek programs that run under a full Python system, but most Python programs will not run under Snek."[162] Snek is compatible with 8-bit AVR microcontrollers such as ATmega 328P-based Arduino, as well as larger microcontrollers that are compatible with MicroPython. Snek is an imperative language that (unlike Python) omits object-oriented programming. Snek supports only one numeric data type, which features 32-bit single precision (resembling JavaScript numbers, though smaller).

Unsupported implementations

Stackless Python is a significant fork of CPython that implements microthreads. This implementation uses the call stack differently, thus allowing massively concurrent programs. PyPy also offers a stackless version.[163]

Just-in-time Python compilers have been developed, but are now unsupported:

Google began a project named Unladen Swallow in 2009: this project aimed to speed up the Python interpreter five-fold by using LLVM, and improve multithreading capability for scaling to thousands of cores,[164] while typical implementations are limited by the global interpreter lock.
Psyco is a discontinued just-in-time specializing compiler, which integrates with CPython and transforms bytecode to machine code at runtime. The emitted code is specialized for certain data types and is faster than standard Python code. Psyco does not support Python 2.7 or later.
PyS60 was a Python 2 interpreter for Series 60 mobile phones, which was released by Nokia in 2005. The interpreter implemented many modules from Python's standard library, as well as additional modules for integration with the Symbian operating system. The Nokia N900 also supports Python through the GTK widget library, allowing programs to be written and run on the target device.[165]

Cross-compilers to other languages

There are several compilers/transpilers to high-level object languages; the source language is unrestricted Python, a subset of Python, or a language similar to Python:

Brython,[166] Transcrypt,[167][168] and Pyjs compile Python to JavaScript. (The latest release of Pyjs was in 2012.)
Cython compiles a superset of Python to C. The resulting code can be used with Python via direct C-level API calls into the Python interpreter.
PyJL compiles/transpiles a subset of Python to "human-readable, maintainable, and high-performance Julia source code".[92] Despite the developers' performance claims, this is not possible for arbitrary Python code; that is, compiling to a faster language or machine code is known to be impossible in the general case. The semantics of Python might potentially be changed, but in many cases speedup is possible with few or no changes in the Python code. The faster Julia source code can then be used from Python or compiled to machine code.
Nuitka compiles Python into C.[169] This compiler works with Python 3.4 to 3.12 (and 2.6 and 2.7) for Python's main supported platforms (and Windows 7 or even Windows XP) and for Android. The compiler developers claim full support for Python 3.10, partial support for Python 3.11 and 3.12,  and experimental support for Python 3.13. Nuitka supports macOS including Apple Silicon-based versions.  The compiler is free of cost, though it has commercial add-ons (e.g., for hiding source code).
Numba is a JIT compiler that is used from Python; the compiler translates a subset of Python and NumPy code into fast machine code. This tool is enabled by adding a decorator to the relevant Python code.
Pythran compiles a subset of Python 3 to C++ (C++11).[170]
RPython can be compiled to C, and it is used to build the PyPy interpreter for Python.
The Python → 11l → C++ transpiler[171] compiles a subset of Python 3 to C++ (C++17).

There are also specialized compilers:

MyHDL is a Python-based hardware description language (HDL) that converts MyHDL code to Verilog or VHDL code.

Some older projects existed, as well as compilers not designed for use with Python 3.x and related syntax:

Google's Grumpy transpiles Python 2 to Go.[172][173][174] The latest release was in 2017.
IronPython allows running Python 2.7 programs with the .NET Common Language Runtime.[175] An alpha version (released in 2021), is available for "Python 3.4, although features and behaviors from later versions may be included."[176]
Jython compiles Python 2.7 to Java bytecode, allowing the use of Java libraries from a Python program.[177]
Pyrex (last released in 2010) and Shed Skin (last released in 2013) compile to C and C++ respectively.

Performance

A perforance comparison among various Python implementations, using a non-numerical (combinatorial) workload, was presented at EuroSciPy '13.[178] In addition, Python's performance relative to other programming languages is benchmarked by The Computer Language Benchmarks Game.[179]

There are several approaches to optimizing Python performance, given the inherent slowness of an interpreted language. These approaches include the following strategies or tools:

Just-in-time compilation: Dynamically compiling Python code just before it is executed. This technique is used in libraries such as Numba and PyPy.
Static compilation: Python code is compiled into machine code sometime before execution. An example of this approach is Cython, which compiles Python into C.
Concurrency and parallelism: Multiple tasks can be run simultaneously. Python contains modules such as `multiprocessing` to support this form of parallelism. Moreover, this approach helps to overcome limitations of the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) in CPU tasks.
Efficient data structures: Performance can also be improved by using data types such as Set for membership tests, or deque from collections for queue operations.

Language Development

Python's development is conducted largely through the Python Enhancement Proposal (PEP) process; this process is the primary mechanism for proposing major new features, collecting community input on issues, and documenting Python design decisions.[180] Python coding style is covered in PEP 8.[181] Outstanding PEPs are reviewed and commented on by the Python community and the steering council.[180]

Enhancement of the language corresponds with development of the CPython reference implementation. The mailing list python-dev is the primary forum for the language's development. Specific issues were originally discussed in the Roundup bug tracker hosted by the foundation.[182] In 2022, all issues and discussions were migrated to GitHub.[183] Development originally took place on a self-hosted source-code repository running Mercurial, until Python moved to GitHub in January 2017.[184]

CPython's public releases have three types, distinguished by which part of the version number is incremented:

Backward-incompatible versions, where code is expected to break and must be manually ported. The first part of the version number is incremented. These releases happen infrequently—version 3.0 was released 8 years after 2.0. According to Guido van Rossum, a version 4.0 will probably never exist.[185]
Major or "feature" releases are largely compatible with the previous version but introduce new features. The second part of the version number is incremented. Starting with Python 3.9, these releases are expected to occur annually.[186][187] Each major version is supported by bug fixes for several years after its release.[188]
Bug fix releases,[189] which introduce no new features, occur approximately every three months; these releases are made when a sufficient number of bugs have been fixed upstream since the last release. Security vulnerabilities are also patched in these releases. The third and final part of the version number is incremented.[189]

Many alpha, beta, and release-candidates are also released as previews and for testing before final releases. Although there is a rough schedule for releases, they are often delayed if the code is not ready yet. Python's development team monitors the state of the code by running a large unit test suite during development.[190]

The major academic conference on Python is PyCon. There are also special Python mentoring programs, such as PyLadies.

API documentation generators

Tools that can generate documentation for Python API include pydoc (available as part of the standard library); Sphinx; and Pdoc and its forks, Doxygen and Graphviz.[191]

Naming

Python's name is inspired by the British comedy group Monty Python, whom Python creator Guido van Rossum enjoyed while developing the language. Monty Python references appear frequently in Python code and culture;[192] for example, the metasyntactic variables often used in Python literature are spam and eggs, rather than the traditional foo and bar.[192][193] The official Python documentation also contains various references to Monty Python routines.[194][195] Python users are sometimes referred to as "Pythonistas".[196]

The affix Py is often used when naming Python applications or libraries. Some examples include the following:

Pygame, a binding of Simple DirectMedia Layer to Python (commonly used to create games);
PyQt and PyGTK, which bind Qt and GTK to Python respectively;
PyPy, a Python implementation originally written in Python;
NumPy, a Python library for numerical processing.

Popularity

Since 2003, Python has consistently ranked in the top ten of the most popular programming languages in the TIOBE Programming Community Index; as of December 2022[update], Python was the most popular language.[40] Python was selected as Programming Language of the Year (for "the highest rise in ratings in a year") in 2007, 2010, 2018, and 2020—the only language to have done so four times as of 2020[update][197]). In the TIOBE Index, monthly rankings are based on the volume of searches for programming languages on Google, Amazon, Wikipedia, Bing, and 20 other platforms. According to the accompanying graph, Python has shown a marked upward trend since the early 2000s, eventually passing more established languages such as C, C++, and Java. This trend can be attributed to Python's readable syntax, comprehensive standard library, and application in data science and machine learning fields.[198]

Large organizations that use Python include Wikipedia, Google,[199] Yahoo!,[200] CERN,[201] NASA,[202] Facebook,[203] Amazon, Instagram,[204] Spotify,[205] and some smaller entities such as Industrial Light & Magic[206] and ITA.[207] The social news networking site Reddit was developed mostly in Python.[208] Organizations that partly use Python include Discord[209] and Baidu.[210]

Types of Use

Python has many uses, including the following:

Scripting for web applications
Scientific computing
Artificial-intelligence and machine-learning projects
Graphical user interfaces and desktop environments
Embedded scripting in software and hardware products
Operating systems
Information security

Python can serve as a scripting language for web applications, e.g., via the mod_wsgi module for the Apache web server.[211] With Web Server Gateway Interface, a standard API has evolved to facilitate these applications. Web frameworks such as Django, Pylons, Pyramid, TurboGears, web2py, Tornado, Flask, Bottle, and Zope support developers in the design and maintenance of complex applications. Pyjs and IronPython can be used to develop the client-side of Ajax-based applications. SQLAlchemy can be used as a data mapper to a relational database. Twisted is a framework to program communication between computers; this framework is used by Dropbox, for example.

Libraries such as NumPy, SciPy and Matplotlib allow the effective use of Python in scientific computing,[212][213] with specialized libraries such as Biopython and Astropy providing domain-specific functionality. SageMath is a computer algebra system with a notebook interface that is programmable in Python; the SageMath library covers many aspects of mathematics, including algebra, combinatorics, numerical mathematics, number theory, and calculus.[214] OpenCV has Python bindings with a rich set of features for computer vision and image processing.[215]

Python is commonly used in artificial-intelligence and machine-learning projects, with support from libraries such as TensorFlow, Keras, Pytorch, scikit-learn and ProbLog (a logic language).[216][217][218][219][220] As a scripting language with a modular architecture, simple syntax, and rich text processing tools, Python is often used for natural language processing.[221]

The combination of Python and Prolog has proven useful for AI applications, with Prolog providing knowledge representation and reasoning capabilities. The Janus system, in particular, exploits similarities between these two languages, in part because of their dynamic typing and their simple, recursive data structures. This combination is typically applied natural language processing, visual query answering, geospatial reasoning, and handling semantic web data.[222][223]
The Natlog system, implemented in Python, uses Definite Clause Grammars (DCGs) to create prompts for two types of generators: text-to-text generators such as GPT3, and text-to-image generators such as DALL-E or Stable Diffusion.[224]

Python can be used for graphical user interfaces (GUIs), by using libraries such as Tkinter.[225] Similarly, for the One Laptop per Child XO computer, most of the Sugar desktop environment is written in Python (as of 2008).[226]

Python is embedded in many software products (and some hardware products) as a scripting language. These products include the following:

finite element method software such as Abaqus,
3D parametric modelers such as FreeCAD,
3D animation packages such as 3ds Max, Blender, Cinema 4D, Lightwave, Houdini, Maya, modo, MotionBuilder, Softimage,
the visual effects compositor Nuke,
2D imaging programs such as GIMP,[227] Inkscape, Scribus and Paint Shop Pro,[228] and
musical notation programs such as scorewriter and capella.

Similarly, GNU Debugger uses Python as a pretty printer to show complex structures such as C++ containers. Esri promotes Python as the best choice for writing scripts in ArcGIS.[229] Python has also been used in several video games,[230][231] and it has been adopted as first of the three programming languages available in Google App Engine (the other two being Java and Go).[232] LibreOffice includes Python, and its developers plan to replace Java with Python; LibreOffice's Python Scripting Provider is a core feature[233] since version 4.0 (from 7 February 2013).

Among hardware products, the Raspberry Pi single-board computer project has adopted Python as its main user-programming language.

Many operating systems include Python as a standard component. Python ships with most Linux distributions,[234] AmigaOS 4 (using Python 2.7), FreeBSD (as a package), NetBSD, and OpenBSD (as a package); it can be used from the command line (terminal). Many Linux distributions use installers written in Python: Ubuntu uses the Ubiquity installer, while Red Hat Linux and Fedora Linux use the Anaconda installer. Gentoo Linux uses Python in its package management system, Portage.[235]

Python is used extensively in the information security industry, including in exploit development.[236][237]

Languages influenced by Python

Python's design and philosophy have influenced many other programming languages:

Boo uses indentation, a similar syntax, and a similar object model.[238]
Cobra uses indentation and a similar syntax; its Acknowledgements document lists Python first among influencing languages.[239]
CoffeeScript, a programming language that cross-compiles to JavaScript, has a Python-inspired syntax.
ECMAScript–JavaScript borrowed iterators and generators from Python.[240]
GDScript, a Python-like scripting language that is built in to the Godot game engine.[241]
Go is designed for "speed of working in a dynamic language like Python"[242]; Go shares Python's syntax for slicing arrays.
Groovy was motivated by a desire to incorporate the Python design philosophy into Java.[243]
Julia was designed to be "as usable for general programming as Python".[27]
Mojo is a non-strict[28][244] superset of Python (e.g., omitting classes, and adding struct).[245]
Nim uses indentation and a similar syntax.[246]
Ruby's creator, Yukihiro Matsumoto, said that "I wanted a scripting language that was more powerful than Perl, and more object-oriented than Python. That's why I decided to design my own language."[247]
Swift, a programming language developed by Apple, has some Python-inspired syntax.[248]
Kotlin blends Python and Java features, which minimizes boilerplate code and enhances developer efficiency.[249]

Python's development practices have also been emulated by other languages. For example, Python requires a document that describes the rationale and context for any language change; this document is known as a Python Enhancement Proposal or PEP. This practice is also used by the developers of Tcl,[250] Erlang,[251] and Swift.[252]

See also

Computer programming portalFree and open-source software portal

Python syntax and semantics
pip (package manager)
List of programming languages
History of programming languages
Comparison of programming languages

Notes

^ del in Python does not behave the same way delete in languages such as C++ does, where such a word is used to call the destructor and deallocate heap memory.

References

^ "General Python FAQ – Python 3 documentation". docs.python.org. Retrieved 7 July 2024.

^ "Python 0.9.1 part 01/21". alt.sources archives. Archived from the original on 11 August 2021. Retrieved 11 August 2021.

^ "Why is Python a dynamic language and also a strongly typed language". Python Wiki. Archived from the original on 14 March 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2021.

^ a b "PEP 483 – The Theory of Type Hints". Python.org. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 14 June 2018.

^ "PEP 11 – CPython platform support | peps.python.org". Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs). Retrieved 22 April 2024.

^ "PEP 738 – Adding Android as a supported platform | peps.python.org". Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs). Retrieved 19 May 2024.

^ "Download Python for Other Platforms". Python.org. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 18 August 2023.

^ "test – Regression tests package for Python – Python 3.7.13 documentation". docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2022.

^ "platform – Access to underlying platform's identifying data – Python 3.10.4 documentation". docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2022.

^ Holth, Moore (30 March 2014). "PEP 0441 – Improving Python ZIP Application Support". Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 12 November 2015.

^ "Starlark Language". Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 25 May 2019.

^ a b "Why was Python created in the first place?". General Python FAQ. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Retrieved 22 March 2007. I had extensive experience with implementing an interpreted language in the ABC group at CWI, and from working with this group I had learned a lot about language design. This is the origin of many Python features, including the use of indentation for statement grouping and the inclusion of very high-level data types (although the details are all different in Python).

^ "Ada 83 Reference Manual (raise statement)". Archived from the original on 22 October 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2020.

^ a b Kuchling, Andrew M. (22 December 2006). "Interview with Guido van Rossum (July 1998)". amk.ca. Archived from the original on 1 May 2007. Retrieved 12 March 2012. I'd spent a summer at DEC's Systems Research Center, which introduced me to Modula-2+; the Modula-3 final report was being written there at about the same time. What I learned there later showed up in Python's exception handling, modules, and the fact that methods explicitly contain 'self' in their parameter list. String slicing came from Algol-68 and Icon.

^ a b c "itertools – Functions creating iterators for efficient looping – Python 3.7.1 documentation". docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 22 November 2016. This module implements a number of iterator building blocks inspired by constructs from APL, Haskell, and SML.

^ van Rossum, Guido (1993). "An Introduction to Python for UNIX/C Programmers". Proceedings of the NLUUG Najaarsconferentie (Dutch UNIX Users Group). CiteSeerX 10.1.1.38.2023. even though the design of C is far from ideal, its influence on Python is considerable.

^ a b "Classes". The Python Tutorial. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 20 February 2012. It is a mixture of the class mechanisms found in C++ and Modula-3

^ Lundh, Fredrik. "Call By Object". effbot.org. Archived from the original on 23 November 2019. Retrieved 21 November 2017. replace "CLU" with "Python", "record" with "instance", and "procedure" with "function or method", and you get a pretty accurate description of Python's object model.

^ Simionato, Michele. "The Python 2.3 Method Resolution Order". Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 20 August 2020. Retrieved 29 July 2014. The C3 method itself has nothing to do with Python, since it was invented by people working on Dylan and it is described in a paper intended for lispers

^ Kuchling, A. M. "Functional Programming HOWTO". Python v2.7.2 documentation. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Retrieved 9 February 2012. List comprehensions and generator expressions [...] are a concise notation for such operations, borrowed from the functional programming language Haskell.

^ Schemenauer, Neil; Peters, Tim; Hetland, Magnus Lie (18 May 2001). "PEP 255 – Simple Generators". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 9 February 2012.

^ "More Control Flow Tools". Python 3 documentation. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 4 June 2016. Retrieved 24 July 2015. By popular demand, a few features commonly found in functional programming languages like Lisp have been added to Python. With the lambda keyword, small anonymous functions can be created.

^ "re – Regular expression operations – Python 3.10.6 documentation". docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 18 July 2018. Retrieved 6 September 2022. This module provides regular expression matching operations similar to those found in Perl.

^ "CoffeeScript". coffeescript.org. Archived from the original on 12 June 2020. Retrieved 3 July 2018.

^ "Perl and Python influences in JavaScript". www.2ality.com. 24 February 2013. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 15 May 2015.

^ Rauschmayer, Axel. "Chapter 3: The Nature of JavaScript; Influences". O'Reilly, Speaking JavaScript. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 15 May 2015.

^ a b "Why We Created Julia". Julia website. February 2012. Archived from the original on 2 May 2020. Retrieved 5 June 2014. We want something as usable for general programming as Python [...]

^ a b Krill, Paul (4 May 2023). "Mojo language marries Python and MLIR for AI development". InfoWorld. Archived from the original on 5 May 2023. Retrieved 5 May 2023.

^ Ring Team (4 December 2017). "Ring and other languages". ring-lang.net. ring-lang. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 4 December 2017.

^ Bini, Ola (2007). Practical JRuby on Rails Web 2.0 Projects: bringing Ruby on Rails to the Java platform. Berkeley: APress. p. 3. ISBN 978-1-59059-881-8.

^ Lattner, Chris (3 June 2014). "Chris Lattner's Homepage". Chris Lattner. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 3 June 2014. The Swift language is the product of tireless effort from a team of language experts, documentation gurus, compiler optimization ninjas, and an incredibly important internal dogfooding group who provided feedback to help refine and battle-test ideas. Of course, it also greatly benefited from the experiences hard-won by many other languages in the field, drawing ideas from Objective-C, Rust, Haskell, Ruby, Python, C#, CLU, and far too many others to list.

^ "V documentation (Introduction)". GitHub. Retrieved 24 December 2024.

^ Kuhlman, Dave. "A Python Book: Beginning Python, Advanced Python, and Python Exercises". Section 1.1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 June 2012.

^ "About Python". Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 20 April 2012. Retrieved 24 April 2012., second section "Fans of Python use the phrase "batteries included" to describe the standard library, which covers everything from asynchronous processing to zip files."

^ "PEP 206 – Python Advanced Library". Python.org. Archived from the original on 5 May 2021. Retrieved 11 October 2021.

^ Rossum, Guido Van (20 January 2009). "The History of Python: A Brief Timeline of Python". The History of Python. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 5 March 2021.

^ Peterson, Benjamin (20 April 2020). "Python 2.7.18, the last release of Python 2". Python Insider. Archived from the original on 26 April 2020. Retrieved 27 April 2020.

^ "Stack Overflow Developer Survey 2022". Stack Overflow. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022.

^ "The State of Developer Ecosystem in 2020 Infographic". JetBrains: Developer Tools for Professionals and Teams. Archived from the original on 1 March 2021. Retrieved 5 March 2021.

^ a b "TIOBE Index". TIOBE. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018. Retrieved 3 January 2023. The TIOBE Programming Community index is an indicator of the popularity of programming languages Updated as required.

^ "PYPL PopularitY of Programming Language index". pypl.github.io. Archived from the original on 14 March 2017. Retrieved 26 March 2021.

^ a b Venners, Bill (13 January 2003). "The Making of Python". Artima Developer. Artima. Archived from the original on 1 September 2016. Retrieved 22 March 2007.

^ van Rossum, Guido (29 August 2000). "SETL (was: Lukewarm about range literals)". Python-Dev (Mailing list). Archived from the original on 14 July 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2011.

^ van Rossum, Guido (20 January 2009). "A Brief Timeline of Python". The History of Python. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 20 January 2009.

^ Fairchild, Carlie (12 July 2018). "Guido van Rossum Stepping Down from Role as Python's Benevolent Dictator For Life". Linux Journal. Archived from the original on 13 July 2018. Retrieved 13 July 2018.

^ "PEP 8100". Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 4 May 2019.

^ "PEP 13 – Python Language Governance". Python.org. Archived from the original on 27 May 2021. Retrieved 25 August 2021.

^ Briggs, Jason R.; Lipovača, Miran (2013). Python for kids: a playful introduction to programming. San Francisco, Calif: No Starch Press. ISBN 978-1-59327-407-8.

^ Kuchling, A. M.; Zadka, Moshe (16 October 2000). "What's New in Python 2.0". Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 11 February 2012.

^ "PEP 373 – Python 2.7 Release Schedule". python.org. Archived from the original on 19 May 2020. Retrieved 9 January 2017.

^ "PEP 466 – Network Security Enhancements for Python 2.7.x". python.org. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 9 January 2017.

^ "Sunsetting Python 2". Python.org. Archived from the original on 12 January 2020. Retrieved 22 September 2019.

^ "PEP 373 – Python 2.7 Release Schedule". Python.org. Archived from the original on 13 January 2020. Retrieved 22 September 2019.

^ mattip (25 December 2023). "PyPy v7.3.14 release". PyPy. Archived from the original on 5 January 2024. Retrieved 5 January 2024.

^ Langa, Łukasz (17 May 2022). "Python 3.9.13 is now available". Python Insider. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 21 May 2022.

^ "Status of Python versions". Python Developer's Guide. Retrieved 7 October 2024.

^ "Python". endoflife.date. 8 October 2024. Retrieved 20 November 2024.

^ "CVE-2021-3177". Red Hat Customer Portal. Archived from the original on 6 March 2021. Retrieved 26 February 2021.

^ "CVE-2021-3177". CVE. Archived from the original on 27 February 2021. Retrieved 26 February 2021.

^ "CVE-2021-23336". CVE. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 26 February 2021.

^ "Built-in Types".

^ corbet (24 October 2022). "Python 3.11 released [LWN.net]". lwn.net. Retrieved 15 November 2022.

^ "What's New In Python 3.13". Python documentation. Retrieved 30 April 2024.

^ "PEP 667 – Consistent views of namespaces | peps.python.org". Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs). Retrieved 7 October 2024.

^ "PEP 703 – Making the GIL Optional in CPython". Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs). Retrieved 30 March 2025.

^ Wouters, Thomas (9 April 2024). "Python Insider: Python 3.12.3 and 3.13.0a6 released". Python Insider. Retrieved 29 April 2024.

^ "PEP 594 – Removing dead batteries from the standard library". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Softtware Foundation. 20 May 2019.

^ "PEP 761 – Deprecating PGP signatures for CPython artifacts | peps.python.org". Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs). Retrieved 6 January 2025.

^ "1. Extending Python with C or C++ – Python 3.9.1 documentation". docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 23 June 2020. Retrieved 14 February 2021.

^ "PEP 623 – Remove wstr from Unicode". Python.org. Archived from the original on 5 March 2021. Retrieved 14 February 2021.

^ "PEP 634 – Structural Pattern Matching: Specification". Python.org. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 14 February 2021.

^ "PEP 749 – Implementing PEP 649 | peps.python.org". Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs). Retrieved 20 November 2024.

^ "PEP 711: PyBI: a standard format for distributing Python Binaries". Discussions on Python.org. 7 April 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2024.

^ "PEP 686 – Make UTF-8 mode default | peps.python.org". Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs). Retrieved 20 November 2024.

^ The Cain Gang Ltd. "Python Metaclasses: Who? Why? When?" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 May 2009. Retrieved 27 June 2009.

^ "3.3. Special method names". The Python Language Reference. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 27 June 2009.

^ "PyDBC: method preconditions, method postconditions and class invariants for Python". Archived from the original on 23 November 2019. Retrieved 24 September 2011.

^ "Contracts for Python". Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 24 September 2011.

^ "PyDatalog". Archived from the original on 13 June 2020. Retrieved 22 July 2012.

^ "Glue It All Together With Python". Python.org. Retrieved 30 September 2024.

^ "Extending and Embedding the Python Interpreter: Reference Counts". Docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 18 October 2012. Retrieved 5 June 2020. Since Python makes heavy use of malloc() and free(), it needs a strategy to avoid memory leaks as well as the use of freed memory. The chosen method is called reference counting.

^ a b Hettinger, Raymond (30 January 2002). "PEP 289 – Generator Expressions". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 19 February 2012.

^ "6.5 itertools – Functions creating iterators for efficient looping". Docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 22 November 2016.

^ a b Peters, Tim (19 August 2004). "PEP 20 – The Zen of Python". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 24 November 2008.

^ Lutz, Mark (January 2022). "Python Changes 2014+". Learning Python. Archived from the original on 15 March 2024. Retrieved 25 February 2024.

^ "Confusion regarding a rule in The Zen of Python". Python Help - Discussions on Python.org. 3 May 2022. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 25 February 2024.

^ Ambi, Chetan (4 July 2021). "The Most Controversial Python Walrus Operator". Python Simplified. Archived from the original on 27 August 2023. Retrieved 5 February 2024.

^ Grifski, Jeremy (24 May 2020). "The Controversy Behind The Walrus Operator in Python". The Renegade Coder. Archived from the original on 28 December 2023. Retrieved 25 February 2024.

^ Bader, Dan. "Python String Formatting Best Practices". Real Python. Archived from the original on 18 February 2024. Retrieved 25 February 2024.

^ Martelli, Alex; Ravenscroft, Anna; Ascher, David (2005). Python Cookbook, 2nd Edition. O'Reilly Media. p. 230. ISBN 978-0-596-00797-3. Archived from the original on 23 February 2020. Retrieved 14 November 2015.

^ "Python Culture". ebeab. 21 January 2014. Archived from the original on 30 January 2014.

^ a b "Transpiling Python to Julia using PyJL" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 November 2023. Retrieved 20 September 2023. After manually modifying one line of code by specifying the necessary type information, we obtained a speedup of 52.6×, making the translated Julia code 19.5× faster than the original Python code.

^ "Why is it called Python?". General Python FAQ. Docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Retrieved 3 January 2023.

^ "15 Ways Python Is a Powerful Force on the Web". Archived from the original on 11 May 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2018.

^ "pprint – Data pretty printer – Python 3.11.0 documentation". docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2022. stuff=['spam', 'eggs', 'lumberjack', 'knights', 'ni']

^ "Code Style – The Hitchhiker's Guide to Python". docs.python-guide.org. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2021.

^ "Is Python a good language for beginning programmers?". General Python FAQ. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Retrieved 21 March 2007.

^ "Myths about indentation in Python". Secnetix.de. Archived from the original on 18 February 2018. Retrieved 19 April 2011.

^ Guttag, John V. (12 August 2016). Introduction to Computation and Programming Using Python: With Application to Understanding Data. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-52962-4.

^ "PEP 8 – Style Guide for Python Code". Python.org. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 26 March 2019.

^ "8. Errors and Exceptions – Python 3.12.0a0 documentation". docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 9 May 2022. Retrieved 9 May 2022.

^ "Highlights: Python 2.5". Python.org. Archived from the original on 4 August 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2018.

^ van Rossum, Guido (22 April 2009). "Tail Recursion Elimination". Neopythonic.blogspot.be. Archived from the original on 19 May 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2012.

^ van Rossum, Guido (9 February 2006). "Language Design Is Not Just Solving Puzzles". Artima forums. Artima. Archived from the original on 17 January 2020. Retrieved 21 March 2007.

^ van Rossum, Guido; Eby, Phillip J. (10 May 2005). "PEP 342 – Coroutines via Enhanced Generators". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 29 May 2020. Retrieved 19 February 2012.

^ "PEP 380". Python.org. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 3 December 2012.

^ "division". python.org. Archived from the original on 20 July 2006. Retrieved 30 July 2014.

^ "PEP 0465 – A dedicated infix operator for matrix multiplication". python.org. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2016.

^ "Python 3.5.1 Release and Changelog". python.org. Archived from the original on 14 May 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2016.

^ "What's New in Python 3.8". Archived from the original on 8 June 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2019.

^ van Rossum, Guido; Hettinger, Raymond (7 February 2003). "PEP 308 – Conditional Expressions". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2011.

^ "4. Built-in Types – Python 3.6.3rc1 documentation". python.org. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 1 October 2017.

^ "5.3. Tuples and Sequences – Python 3.7.1rc2 documentation". python.org. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 17 October 2018.

^ a b "PEP 498 – Literal String Interpolation". python.org. Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 8 March 2017.

^ "Why must 'self' be used explicitly in method definitions and calls?". Design and History FAQ. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Retrieved 19 February 2012.

^ Sweigart, Al (2020). Beyond the Basic Stuff with Python: Best Practices for Writing Clean Code. No Starch Press. p. 322. ISBN 978-1-59327-966-0. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021.

^ "The Python Language Reference, section 3.3. New-style and classic classes, for release 2.7.1". Archived from the original on 26 October 2012. Retrieved 12 January 2011.

^ "PEP 484 – Type Hints | peps.python.org". peps.python.org. Archived from the original on 27 November 2023. Retrieved 29 November 2023.

^ "typing — Support for type hints". Python documentation. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 21 February 2020. Retrieved 22 December 2023.

^ "mypy – Optional Static Typing for Python". Archived from the original on 6 June 2020. Retrieved 28 January 2017.

^ "Introduction". mypyc.readthedocs.io. Archived from the original on 22 December 2023. Retrieved 22 December 2023.

^ "15. Floating Point Arithmetic: Issues and Limitations – Python 3.8.3 documentation". docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 6 June 2020. Retrieved 6 June 2020. Almost all machines today (November 2000) use IEEE-754 floating point arithmetic, and almost all platforms map Python floats to IEEE-754 "double precision".

^ Zadka, Moshe; van Rossum, Guido (11 March 2001). "PEP 237 – Unifying Long Integers and Integers". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 28 May 2020. Retrieved 24 September 2011.

^ "Built-in Types". Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2019.

^ "PEP 465 – A dedicated infix operator for matrix multiplication". python.org. Archived from the original on 29 May 2020. Retrieved 3 July 2018.

^ a b Zadka, Moshe; van Rossum, Guido (11 March 2001). "PEP 238 – Changing the Division Operator". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 28 May 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2013.

^ "Why Python's Integer Division Floors". 24 August 2010. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 25 August 2010.

^ "round", The Python standard library, release 3.2, §2: Built-in functions, archived from the original on 25 October 2012, retrieved 14 August 2011

^ "round", The Python standard library, release 2.7, §2: Built-in functions, archived from the original on 27 October 2012, retrieved 14 August 2011

^ Beazley, David M. (2009). Python Essential Reference (4th ed.). Addison-Wesley Professional. p. 66. ISBN 9780672329784.

^ Kernighan, Brian W.; Ritchie, Dennis M. (1988). The C Programming Language (2nd ed.). p. 206.

^ a b Batista, Facundo (17 October 2003). "PEP 327 – Decimal Data Type". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2008.

^ "What's New in Python 2.6". Python v2.6.9 documentation. 29 October 2013. Archived from the original on 23 December 2019. Retrieved 26 September 2015.

^ "10 Reasons Python Rocks for Research (And a Few Reasons it Doesn't) – Hoyt Koepke". University of Washington Department of Statistics. Archived from the original on 31 May 2020. Retrieved 3 February 2019.

^ Shell, Scott (17 June 2014). "An introduction to Python for scientific computing" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 February 2019. Retrieved 3 February 2019.

^ Piotrowski, Przemyslaw (July 2006). "Build a Rapid Web Development Environment for Python Server Pages and Oracle". Oracle Technology Network. Oracle. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 12 March 2012.

^ Eby, Phillip J. (7 December 2003). "PEP 333 – Python Web Server Gateway Interface v1.0". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 19 February 2012.

^ "PyPI". PyPI. 13 March 2025. Archived from the original on 22 February 2025.

^ Enthought, Canopy. "Canopy". www.enthought.com. Archived from the original on 15 July 2017. Retrieved 20 August 2016.

^ "Project Jupyter". Jupyter.org. Archived from the original on 12 October 2023. Retrieved 2 April 2025.

^ "PEP 7 – Style Guide for C Code | peps.python.org". peps.python.org. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 28 April 2022.

^ "4. Building C and C++ Extensions – Python 3.9.2 documentation". docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 3 March 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2021.

^ van Rossum, Guido (5 June 2001). "PEP 7 – Style Guide for C Code". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 1 June 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2008.

^ "CPython byte code". Docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 16 February 2016.

^ "Python 2.5 internals" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 August 2012. Retrieved 19 April 2011.

^ "Changelog – Python 3.9.0 documentation". docs.python.org. Archived from the original on 7 February 2021. Retrieved 8 February 2021.

^ "Download Python". Python.org. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 13 December 2020.

^ "history [vmspython]". www.vmspython.org. Archived from the original on 2 December 2020. Retrieved 4 December 2020.

^ "An Interview with Guido van Rossum". Oreilly.com. Archived from the original on 16 July 2014. Retrieved 24 November 2008.

^ "Download Python for Other Platforms". Python.org. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 4 December 2020.

^ "PyPy compatibility". Pypy.org. Archived from the original on 6 June 2020. Retrieved 3 December 2012.

^ Team, The PyPy (28 December 2019). "Download and Install". PyPy. Archived from the original on 8 January 2022. Retrieved 8 January 2022.

^ "speed comparison between CPython and Pypy". Speed.pypy.org. Archived from the original on 10 May 2021. Retrieved 3 December 2012.

^ "Codon: Differences with Python". Archived from the original on 25 May 2023. Retrieved 28 August 2023.

^ Lawson, Loraine (14 March 2023). "MIT-Created Compiler Speeds up Python Code". The New Stack. Archived from the original on 6 April 2023. Retrieved 28 August 2023.

^ "Python-for-EV3". LEGO Education. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2019.

^ Yegulalp, Serdar (29 October 2020). "Pyston returns from the dead to speed Python". InfoWorld. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 26 January 2021.

^ "cinder: Instagram's performance-oriented fork of CPython". GitHub. Archived from the original on 4 May 2021. Retrieved 4 May 2021.

^ Aroca, Rafael (7 August 2021). "Snek Lang: feels like Python on Arduinos". Yet Another Technology Blog. Archived from the original on 5 January 2024. Retrieved 4 January 2024.

^ Aufranc (CNXSoft), Jean-Luc (16 January 2020). "Snekboard Controls LEGO Power Functions with CircuitPython or Snek Programming Languages (Crowdfunding) – CNX Software". CNX Software – Embedded Systems News. Archived from the original on 5 January 2024. Retrieved 4 January 2024.

^ Kennedy (@mkennedy), Michael. "Ready to find out if you're git famous?". pythonbytes.fm. Archived from the original on 5 January 2024. Retrieved 4 January 2024.

^ Packard, Keith (20 December 2022). "The Snek Programming Language: A Python-inspired Embedded Computing Language" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 January 2024. Retrieved 4 January 2024.

^ "Application-level Stackless features – PyPy 2.0.2 documentation". Doc.pypy.org. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 17 July 2013.

^ "Plans for optimizing Python". Google Project Hosting. 15 December 2009. Archived from the original on 11 April 2016. Retrieved 24 September 2011.

^ "Python on the Nokia N900". Stochastic Geometry. 29 April 2010. Archived from the original on 20 June 2019. Retrieved 9 July 2015.

^ "Brython". brython.info. Archived from the original on 3 August 2018. Retrieved 21 January 2021.

^ "Transcrypt – Python in the browser". transcrypt.org. Archived from the original on 19 August 2018. Retrieved 22 December 2020.

^ "Transcrypt: Anatomy of a Python to JavaScript Compiler". InfoQ. Archived from the original on 5 December 2020. Retrieved 20 January 2021.

^ "Nuitka Home | Nuitka Home". nuitka.net. Archived from the original on 30 May 2020. Retrieved 18 August 2017.

^ Guelton, Serge; Brunet, Pierrick; Amini, Mehdi; Merlini, Adrien; Corbillon, Xavier; Raynaud, Alan (16 March 2015). "Pythran: enabling static optimization of scientific Python programs". Computational Science & Discovery. 8 (1). IOP Publishing: 014001. Bibcode:2015CS&D....8a4001G. doi:10.1088/1749-4680/8/1/014001. ISSN 1749-4699.

^ "The Python → 11l → C++ transpiler". Archived from the original on 24 September 2022. Retrieved 17 July 2022.

^ "google/grumpy". 10 April 2020. Archived from the original on 15 April 2020. Retrieved 25 March 2020 – via GitHub.

^ "Projects". opensource.google. Archived from the original on 24 April 2020. Retrieved 25 March 2020.

^ Francisco, Thomas Claburn in San. "Google's Grumpy code makes Python Go". www.theregister.com. Archived from the original on 7 March 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2021.

^ "IronPython.net /". ironpython.net. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021.

^ "GitHub – IronLanguages/ironpython3: Implementation of Python 3.x for .NET Framework that is built on top of the Dynamic Language Runtime". GitHub. Archived from the original on 28 September 2021.

^ "Jython FAQ". www.jython.org. Archived from the original on 22 April 2021. Retrieved 22 April 2021.

^ Murri, Riccardo (2013). Performance of Python runtimes on a non-numeric scientific code. European Conference on Python in Science (EuroSciPy). arXiv:1404.6388. Bibcode:2014arXiv1404.6388M.

^ "The Computer Language Benchmarks Game". Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 30 April 2020.

^ a b Warsaw, Barry; Hylton, Jeremy; Goodger, David (13 June 2000). "PEP 1 – PEP Purpose and Guidelines". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 6 June 2020. Retrieved 19 April 2011.

^ "PEP 8 – Style Guide for Python Code". Python.org. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 26 March 2019.

^ Cannon, Brett. "Guido, Some Guys, and a Mailing List: How Python is Developed". python.org. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 1 June 2009. Retrieved 27 June 2009.

^ "Moving Python's bugs to GitHub [LWN.net]". Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2022.

^ "Python Developer's Guide – Python Developer's Guide". devguide.python.org. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 17 December 2019.

^ Hughes, Owen (24 May 2021). "Programming languages: Why Python 4.0 might never arrive, according to its creator". TechRepublic. Archived from the original on 14 July 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2022.

^ "PEP 602 – Annual Release Cycle for Python". Python.org. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 6 November 2019.

^ "Changing the Python release cadence [LWN.net]". lwn.net. Archived from the original on 6 November 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2019.

^ Norwitz, Neal (8 April 2002). "[Python-Dev] Release Schedules (was Stability & change)". Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 27 June 2009.

^ a b Aahz; Baxter, Anthony (15 March 2001). "PEP 6 – Bug Fix Releases". Python Enhancement Proposals. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 27 June 2009.

^ "Python Buildbot". Python Developer's Guide. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 24 September 2011.

^ "Documentation Tools". Python.org. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 22 March 2021.

^ a b "Whetting Your Appetite". The Python Tutorial. Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 26 October 2012. Retrieved 20 February 2012.

^ "In Python, should I use else after a return in an if block?". Stack Overflow. Stack Exchange. 17 February 2011. Archived from the original on 20 June 2019. Retrieved 6 May 2011.

^ Lutz, Mark (2009). Learning Python: Powerful Object-Oriented Programming. O'Reilly Media, Inc. p. 17. ISBN 9781449379322. Archived from the original on 17 July 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017.

^ Fehily, Chris (2002). Python. Peachpit Press. p. xv. ISBN 9780201748840. Archived from the original on 17 July 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017.

^ Lubanovic, Bill (2014). Introducing Python. Sebastopol, CA : O'Reilly Media. p. 305. ISBN 978-1-4493-5936-2. Retrieved 31 July 2023.

^ Blake, Troy (18 January 2021). "TIOBE Index for January 2021". Technology News and Information by SeniorDBA. Archived from the original on 21 March 2021. Retrieved 26 February 2021.

^ "TIOBE Index". TIOBE. Retrieved 31 March 2025.

^ "Quotes about Python". Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 3 June 2020. Retrieved 8 January 2012.

^ "Organizations Using Python". Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 21 August 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2009.

^ "Python : the holy grail of programming". CERN Bulletin (31/2006). CERN Publications. 31 July 2006. Archived from the original on 15 January 2013. Retrieved 11 February 2012.

^ Shafer, Daniel G. (17 January 2003). "Python Streamlines Space Shuttle Mission Design". Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2008.

^ "Tornado: Facebook's Real-Time Web Framework for Python – Facebook for Developers". Facebook for Developers. Archived from the original on 19 February 2019. Retrieved 19 June 2018.

^ "What Powers Instagram: Hundreds of Instances, Dozens of Technologies". Instagram Engineering. 11 December 2016. Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 27 May 2019.

^ "How we use Python at Spotify". Spotify Labs. 20 March 2013. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 25 July 2018.

^ Fortenberry, Tim (17 January 2003). "Industrial Light & Magic Runs on Python". Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 6 June 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2012.

^ Taft, Darryl K. (5 March 2007). "Python Slithers into Systems". eWeek.com. Ziff Davis Holdings. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 24 September 2011.

^ GitHub – reddit-archive/reddit: historical code from reddit.com., The Reddit Archives, archived from the original on 1 June 2020, retrieved 20 March 2019

^ "Real time communication at scale with Elixir at Discord". 8 October 2020.

^ "What Programming Language is Baidu Built In?". 5 July 2018.

^ "Usage statistics and market share of Python for websites". 2012. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2012.

^ Oliphant, Travis (2007). "Python for Scientific Computing". Computing in Science and Engineering. 9 (3): 10–20. Bibcode:2007CSE.....9c..10O. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.474.6460. doi:10.1109/MCSE.2007.58. ISSN 1521-9615. S2CID 206457124. Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 10 April 2015.

^ Millman, K. Jarrod; Aivazis, Michael (2011). "Python for Scientists and Engineers". Computing in Science and Engineering. 13 (2): 9–12. Bibcode:2011CSE....13b...9M. doi:10.1109/MCSE.2011.36. Archived from the original on 19 February 2019. Retrieved 7 July 2014.

^ Science education with SageMath, Innovative Computing in Science Education, archived from the original on 15 June 2020, retrieved 22 April 2019

^ "OpenCV: OpenCV-Python Tutorials". docs.opencv.org. Archived from the original on 23 September 2020. Retrieved 14 September 2020.

^ Dean, Jeff; Monga, Rajat; et al. (9 November 2015). "TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems" (PDF). TensorFlow.org. Google Research. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 November 2015. Retrieved 10 November 2015.

^ Piatetsky, Gregory. "Python eats away at R: Top Software for Analytics, Data Science, Machine Learning in 2018: Trends and Analysis". KDnuggets. Archived from the original on 15 November 2019. Retrieved 30 May 2018.

^ "Who is using scikit-learn? – scikit-learn 0.20.1 documentation". scikit-learn.org. Archived from the original on 6 May 2020. Retrieved 30 November 2018.

^ Jouppi, Norm. "Google supercharges machine learning tasks with TPU custom chip". Google Cloud Platform Blog. Archived from the original on 18 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016.

^ De Raedt, Luc; Kimmig, Angelika (2015). "Probabilistic (logic) programming concepts". Machine Learning. 100 (1): 5–47. doi:10.1007/s10994-015-5494-z. S2CID 3166992.

^ "Natural Language Toolkit – NLTK 3.5b1 documentation". www.nltk.org. Archived from the original on 13 June 2020. Retrieved 10 April 2020.

^ Andersen, C. and Swift, T., 2023. The Janus System: a bridge to new prolog applications. In Prolog: The Next 50 Years (pp. 93–104). Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland.

^ "SWI-Prolog Python interface". Archived from the original on 15 March 2024. Retrieved 15 March 2024.

^ Tarau, P., 2023. Reflections on automation, learnability and expressiveness in logic-based programming languages. In Prolog: The Next 50 Years (pp. 359–371). Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland.

^ "Tkinter — Python interface to TCL/Tk". Archived from the original on 18 October 2012. Retrieved 9 June 2023.

^ "Python Tkinter Tutorial". 3 June 2020. Archived from the original on 9 June 2023. Retrieved 9 June 2023.

^ "Installers for GIMP for Windows – Frequently Asked Questions". 26 July 2013. Archived from the original on 17 July 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2013.

^ "jasc psp9components". Archived from the original on 19 March 2008.

^ "About getting started with writing geoprocessing scripts". ArcGIS Desktop Help 9.2. Environmental Systems Research Institute. 17 November 2006. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2012.

^ CCP porkbelly (24 August 2010). "Stackless Python 2.7". EVE Community Dev Blogs. CCP Games. Archived from the original on 11 January 2014. Retrieved 11 January 2014. As you may know, EVE has at its core the programming language known as Stackless Python.

^ Caudill, Barry (20 September 2005). "Modding Sid Meier's Civilization IV". Sid Meier's Civilization IV Developer Blog. Firaxis Games. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. we created three levels of tools ... The next level offers Python and XML support, letting modders with more experience manipulate the game world and everything in it.

^ "Python Language Guide (v1.0)". Google Documents List Data API v1.0. Archived from the original on 15 July 2010.

^ "4.0 New Features and Fixes". LibreOffice.org. The Document Foundation. 2013. Archived from the original on 9 February 2014. Retrieved 25 February 2013.

^ "Python Setup and Usage". Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 17 June 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2020.

^ "What is Sugar?". Sugar Labs. Archived from the original on 9 January 2009. Retrieved 11 February 2012.

^ "Immunity: Knowing You're Secure". Archived from the original on 16 February 2009.

^ "Core Security". Core Security. Archived from the original on 9 June 2020. Retrieved 10 April 2020.

^ "Gotchas for Python Users". boo.codehaus.org. Codehaus Foundation. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 24 November 2008.

^ Esterbrook, Charles. "Acknowledgements". cobra-language.com. Cobra Language. Archived from the original on 8 February 2008. Retrieved 7 April 2010.

^ "Proposals: iterators and generators [ES4 Wiki]". wiki.ecmascript.org. Archived from the original on 20 October 2007. Retrieved 24 November 2008.

^ "Frequently asked questions". Godot Engine documentation. Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 10 May 2021.

^ Kincaid, Jason (10 November 2009). "Google's Go: A New Programming Language That's Python Meets C++". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on 18 January 2010. Retrieved 29 January 2010.

^ Strachan, James (29 August 2003). "Groovy – the birth of a new dynamic language for the Java platform". Archived from the original on 5 April 2007. Retrieved 11 June 2007.

^ "Modular Docs – Why Mojo". docs.modular.com. Archived from the original on 5 May 2023. Retrieved 5 May 2023. Mojo as a member of the Python family [..] Embracing Python massively simplifies our design efforts, because most of the syntax is already specified.  [..] we decided that the right long-term goal for Mojo is to provide a superset of Python (i.e. be compatible with existing programs) and to embrace the CPython immediately for long-tail ecosystem enablement. To a Python programmer, we expect and hope that Mojo will be immediately familiar, while also providing new tools for developing systems-level code that enable you to do things that Python falls back to C and C++ for.

^ Spencer, Michael (4 May 2023). "What is Mojo Programming Language?". datasciencelearningcenter.substack.com. Archived from the original on 5 May 2023. Retrieved 5 May 2023.

^ Yegulalp, Serdar (16 January 2017). "Nim language draws from best of Python, Rust, Go, and Lisp". InfoWorld. Archived from the original on 13 October 2018. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Nim's syntax is strongly reminiscent of Python's, as it uses indented code blocks and some of the same syntax (such as the way if/elif/then/else blocks are constructed).

^ "An Interview with the Creator of Ruby". Linuxdevcenter.com. Archived from the original on 28 April 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2012.

^ Lattner, Chris (3 June 2014). "Chris Lattner's Homepage". Chris Lattner. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 3 June 2014. I started work on the Swift Programming Language in July of 2010. I implemented much of the basic language structure, with only a few people knowing of its existence. A few other (amazing) people started contributing in earnest late in 2011, and it became a major focus for the Apple Developer Tools group in July 2013 [...] drawing ideas from Objective-C, Rust, Haskell, Ruby, Python, C#, CLU, and far too many others to list.

^ Jalan, Nishant Aanjaney (10 November 2022). "Programming in Kotlin". CodeX. Retrieved 29 April 2024.

^ Kupries, Andreas; Fellows, Donal K. (14 September 2000). "TIP #3: TIP Format". tcl.tk. Tcl Developer Xchange. Archived from the original on 13 July 2017. Retrieved 24 November 2008.

^ Gustafsson, Per; Niskanen, Raimo (29 January 2007). "EEP 1: EEP Purpose and Guidelines". erlang.org. Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 19 April 2011.

^ "Swift Evolution Process". Swift Programming Language Evolution repository on GitHub. 18 February 2020. Archived from the original on 27 April 2020. Retrieved 27 April 2020.

Sources

"Python for Artificial Intelligence". Python Wiki. 19 July 2012. Archived from the original on 1 November 2012. Retrieved 3 December 2012.
Paine, Jocelyn, ed. (August 2005). "AI in Python". AI Expert Newsletter. Amzi!. Archived from the original on 26 March 2012. Retrieved 11 February 2012.
"PyAIML 0.8.5 : Python Package Index". Pypi.python.org. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
Russell, Stuart J. & Norvig, Peter (2009). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-604259-4.

Further reading

Downey, Allen (July 2024). Think Python: How to Think Like a Computer Scientist (3rd ed.). O'Reilly Media. ISBN 978-1098155438.
Lutz, Mark (2013). Learning Python (5th ed.). O'Reilly Media. ISBN 978-0-596-15806-4.
Summerfield, Mark (2009). Programming in Python 3 (2nd ed.). Addison-Wesley Professional. ISBN 978-0-321-68056-3.
Ramalho, Luciano (May 2022). Fluent Python. O'Reilly Media. ISBN 978-1-4920-5632-4.

External links

Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityData from Wikidata

Official website 
The Python Tutorial

vte

CircuitPython
CLPython
CPython
Cython
MicroPython
Numba
IronPython
Jython
Psyco
PyPy
Python for S60
Shed Skin
Stackless Python
Unladen Swallow
more...

eric
IDLE
Ninja-IDE
PyCharm
PyDev
Spyder
more...

WSGI
ASGI

Guido van Rossum

Software (list)
Python Software Foundation
Python Conference (PyCon)

vte

Comparison
Timeline
History

Ada
ALGOL
Simula
APL
Assembly
BASIC
Visual Basic
classic
.NET
C
C++
C#
COBOL
Erlang
Elixir
Forth
Fortran
Go
Haskell
Java
JavaScript
Julia
Kotlin
Lisp
Lua
MATLAB
ML
Caml 
OCaml
Pascal
Object Pascal
Perl 
Raku
PHP
Prolog
Python
R
Ruby
Rust
SAS
SQL
Scratch
Shell
Smalltalk
Swift
more...

Simula

Visual Basic
classic
.NET

classic
.NET

Elixir

Caml 
OCaml

OCaml

Object Pascal

Raku

Lists: Alphabetical
Categorical
Generational
Non-English-based
 Category

vte

CherryPy
CubicWeb
Django
FastAPI
Flask
Grok
Nevow
Pylons
Pyramid
Quixote
Tornado
TurboGears
TwistedWeb
web2py
Zope 2
more...

Comparison

vte

Differentiable programming
Information geometry
Statistical manifold
Automatic differentiation
Neuromorphic computing
Pattern recognition
Ricci calculus
Computational learning theory
Inductive bias

IPU
TPU
VPU
Memristor
SpiNNaker

TensorFlow
PyTorch
Keras
scikit-learn
Theano
JAX
Flux.jl
MindSpore

Portals
Computer programming
Technology

Computer programming
Technology

vte

Alternative terms for free software
Comparison of open-source and closed-source software
Comparison of source-code-hosting facilities
Free software
Free software project directories
Gratis versus libre
Long-term support
Open-source software
Open-source software development
Outline
Timeline

Audio
Bioinformatics
Codecs
Configuration management
Drivers
Graphics
Wireless
Health
Mathematics
Office suites
Operating systems
Routing
Television
Video games
Web applications
E-commerce
Android apps
iOS apps
Commercial
Formerly proprietary
Formerly open-source

Graphics
Wireless

E-commerce

Free software movement
History
Open-source-software movement
Events
Advocacy

Free Software Movement of India
Free Software Foundation

AFL
Apache
APSL
Artistic
Beerware
BSD
Creative Commons
CDDL
EPL
Free Software Foundation
GNU GPL
GNU AGPL
GNU LGPL
ISC
MIT
MPL
Python
Python Software Foundation License
Shared Source Initiative
Sleepycat
Unlicense
WTFPL
zlib

GNU GPL
GNU AGPL
GNU LGPL

Comparison of licenses
Contributor License Agreement
Copyleft
Debian Free Software Guidelines
Definition of Free Cultural Works
Free license
The Free Software Definition
The Open Source Definition
Open-source license
Permissive software license
Public domain

Digital rights management
License proliferation
Mozilla software rebranding
Proprietary device drivers
Proprietary firmware
Proprietary software
SCO/Linux controversies
Software patents
Software security
Tivoization
Trusted Computing

Forking
GNU Manifesto
Microsoft Open Specification Promise
Open-core model
Open-source hardware
Shared Source Initiative
Source-available software
The Cathedral and the Bazaar
Revolution OS

Portal
 Category

vte

Dataplot
Epi Info
CSPro
X-12-ARIMA

ADMB
DAP
gretl
jamovi
JASP
JAGS
JMulTi
Julia
Jupyter (Julia, Python, R)
GNU Octave
OpenBUGS
Orange
PSPP
Python (statsmodels, PyMC3, IPython, IDLE)
R (RStudio)
SageMath
SimFiT
SOFA Statistics
Stan
XLispStat

BV4.1
CumFreq
SegReg
XploRe
WinBUGS

Data Desk
GAUSS
GraphPad InStat
GraphPad Prism
IBM SPSS Statistics
IBM SPSS Modeler
JMP
Maple
Mathcad
Mathematica
MATLAB
OxMetrics
RATS
Revolution Analytics
SAS (SAS Viya)
SmartPLS
Stata
StatView
SUDAAN
S-PLUS
TSP
World Programming System (WPS)

BMDP
EViews
GenStat
LIMDEP
LISREL
MedCalc
Microfit
Minitab
MLwiN
NCSS
Shazam
SigmaStat
Statistica
StatsDirect
StatXact
SYSTAT
The Unscrambler
Unistat

Analyse-it
Unistat for Excel
XLfit
RExcel

vte

Advanced Simulation Library
ADMB
Chapel
Euler Mathematical Toolbox
FreeFem++
FreeMat
Genius
Gmsh
GNU Octave
gretl
Julia
Jupyter (Julia, Python, R; IPython)
MFEM
OpenFOAM
Python
R
SageMath
Salome
ScicosLab
Scilab
X10
Weka

Fortress

DADiSP
FEATool Multiphysics
GAUSS
LabVIEW
Maple
Mathcad
Mathematica
MATLAB
MWorks
SAS (SAS Viya)
Speakeasy
VisSim

Comparison

FAST

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataCzech RepublicIsrael

IdRef

