oracle.com/java/java.comdev.java

Java Programming at Wikibooks

Java is a high-level, general-purpose, memory-safe, object-oriented programming language. It is intended to let programmers write once, run anywhere (WORA),[18] meaning that compiled Java code can run on all platforms that support Java without the need to recompile.[19] Java applications are typically compiled to bytecode that can run on any Java virtual machine (JVM) regardless of the underlying computer architecture. The syntax of Java is similar to C and C++, but has fewer low-level facilities than either of them. The Java runtime provides dynamic capabilities (such as reflection and runtime code modification) that are typically not available in traditional compiled languages.

Java gained popularity shortly after its release, and has been a popular programming language since then.[20] Java was the third most popular programming language in 2022[update] according to GitHub.[21] Although still widely popular, there has been a gradual decline in use of Java in recent years with other languages using JVM gaining popularity.[22]

Java was designed by James Gosling at Sun Microsystems. It was released in May 1995 as a core component of Sun's Java platform. The original and reference implementation Java compilers, virtual machines, and class libraries were released by Sun under proprietary licenses. As of May 2007, in compliance with the specifications of the Java Community Process, Sun had relicensed most of its Java technologies under the GPL-2.0-only license. Oracle, which bought Sun in 2010, offers its own HotSpot Java Virtual Machine. However, the official reference implementation is the OpenJDK JVM, which is open-source software used by most developers and is the default JVM for almost all Linux distributions.

Java 24 is the version current as of March 2025[update]. Java 8, 11, 17, and 21 are long-term support versions still under maintenance.

History

James Gosling, Mike Sheridan, and Patrick Naughton initiated the Java language project in June 1991.[23] Java was originally designed for interactive television, but it was too advanced for the digital cable television industry at the time.[24] The language was initially called Oak after an oak tree that stood outside Gosling's office. Later the project went by the name Green and was finally renamed Java, from Java coffee, a type of coffee from Indonesia.[25] Gosling designed Java with a C/C++-style syntax that system and application programmers would find familiar.[26]

Sun Microsystems released the first public implementation as Java 1.0 in 1996.[27] It promised write once, run anywhere (WORA) functionality, providing no-cost run-times on popular platforms. Fairly secure and featuring configurable security, it allowed network- and file-access restrictions. Major web browsers soon incorporated the ability to run Java applets within web pages, and Java quickly became popular. The Java 1.0 compiler was re-written in Java by Arthur van Hoff to comply strictly with the Java 1.0 language specification.[28] With the advent of Java 2 (released initially as J2SE 1.2 in December 1998 –  1999), new versions had multiple configurations built for different types of platforms. J2EE included technologies and APIs for enterprise applications typically run in server environments, while J2ME featured APIs optimized for mobile applications. The desktop version was renamed J2SE. In 2006, for marketing purposes, Sun renamed new J2 versions as Java EE, Java ME, and Java SE, respectively.

In 1997, Sun Microsystems approached the ISO/IEC JTC 1 standards body and later the Ecma International to formalize Java, but it soon withdrew from the process.[29][30][31] Java remains a de facto standard, controlled through the Java Community Process.[32] At one time, Sun made most of its Java implementations available without charge, despite their proprietary software status. Sun generated revenue from Java through the selling of licenses for specialized products such as the Java Enterprise System.

On November 13, 2006, Sun released much of its Java virtual machine (JVM) as free and open-source software (FOSS), under the terms of the GPL-2.0-only license. On May 8, 2007, Sun finished the process, making all of its JVM's core code available under free software/open-source distribution terms, aside from a small portion of code to which Sun did not hold the copyright.[33]

Sun's vice-president Rich Green said that Sun's ideal role with regard to Java was as an evangelist.[34] Following Oracle Corporation's acquisition of Sun Microsystems in 2009–10, Oracle has described itself as the steward of Java technology with a relentless commitment to fostering a community of participation and transparency.[35] This did not prevent Oracle from filing a lawsuit against Google shortly after that for using Java inside the Android SDK (see the Android section).

On April 2, 2010, James Gosling resigned from Oracle.[36]

In January 2016, Oracle announced that Java run-time environments based on JDK 9 will discontinue the browser plugin.[37]

Java software runs on most devices from laptops to data centers, game consoles to scientific supercomputers.[38]

Oracle (and others) highly recommend uninstalling outdated and unsupported versions of Java, due to unresolved security issues in older versions.[39]

Principles

There were five primary goals in creating the Java language:[19]

It must be simple, object-oriented, and familiar.
It must be robust and secure.
It must be architecture-neutral and portable.
It must execute with high performance.
It must be interpreted, threaded, and dynamic.

Versions

As of November 2024[update], Java 8, 11, 17, and 21 are supported as long-term support (LTS) versions, with Java 25, releasing in September 2025, as the next scheduled LTS version.[40]

Oracle released the last zero-cost public update for the legacy version Java 8 LTS in January 2019 for commercial use, although it will otherwise still support Java 8 with public updates for personal use indefinitely. Other vendors such as Adoptium continue to offer free builds of OpenJDK's long-term support (LTS) versions. These builds may include additional security patches and bug fixes.[41]

Major release versions of Java, along with their release dates:

Editions

Java Card
Java ME (Micro Edition)
Java SE (Standard Edition)
Jakarta EE (Enterprise Edition)
JavaFX (bundled in Oracle's JDK from versions 8 to 10 but separately since 11)
PersonalJava (Discontinued)

vte

Sun has defined and supports four editions of Java targeting different application environments and segmented many of its APIs so that they belong to one of the platforms. The platforms are:

Java Card for smart-cards.[47]
Java Platform, Micro Edition (Java ME) – targeting environments with limited resources.[48]
Java Platform, Standard Edition (Java SE) – targeting workstation environments.[49]
Java Platform, Enterprise Edition (Java EE) – targeting large distributed enterprise or Internet environments.[50]

The classes in the Java APIs are organized into separate groups called packages. Each package contains a set of related interfaces, classes, subpackages and exceptions.

Sun also provided an edition called Personal Java that has been superseded by later, standards-based Java ME configuration-profile pairings.

Execution system

Java JVM and bytecode

One design goal of Java is portability, which means that programs written for the Java platform must run similarly on any combination of hardware and operating system with adequate run time support. This is achieved by compiling the Java language code to an intermediate representation called Java bytecode, instead of directly to architecture-specific machine code. Java bytecode instructions are analogous to machine code, but they are intended to be executed by a virtual machine (VM) written specifically for the host hardware. End-users commonly use a Java Runtime Environment (JRE) installed on their device for standalone Java applications or a web browser for Java applets.

Standard libraries provide a generic way to access host-specific features such as graphics, threading, and networking.

The use of universal bytecode makes porting simple. However, the overhead of interpreting bytecode into machine instructions made interpreted programs almost always run more slowly than native executables. Just-in-time (JIT) compilers that compile byte-codes to machine code during runtime were introduced from an early stage. Java's Hotspot compiler is actually two compilers in one; and with GraalVM (included in e.g. Java 11, but removed as of Java 16) allowing tiered compilation.[51] Java itself is platform-independent and is adapted to the particular platform it is to run on by a Java virtual machine (JVM), which translates the Java bytecode into the platform's machine language.[52]

Programs written in Java have a reputation for being slower and requiring more memory than those written in C++.[53][54] However, Java programs' execution speed improved significantly with the introduction of just-in-time compilation in 1997/1998 for Java 1.1,[55] the addition of language features supporting better code analysis (such as inner classes, the StringBuilder class, optional assertions, etc.), and optimizations in the Java virtual machine, such as HotSpot becoming Sun's default JVM in 2000. With Java 1.5, the performance was improved with the addition of the java.util.concurrent package, including lock-free implementations of the ConcurrentMaps and other multi-core collections, and it was improved further with Java 1.6.

Non-JVM

Some platforms offer direct hardware support for Java; there are micro controllers that can run Java bytecode in hardware instead of a software Java virtual machine,[56] and some ARM-based processors could have hardware support for executing Java bytecode through their Jazelle option, though support has mostly been dropped in current implementations of ARM.

Automatic memory management

Java uses an automatic garbage collector to manage memory in the object lifecycle. The programmer determines when objects are created, and the Java runtime is responsible for recovering the memory once objects are no longer in use. Once no references to an object remain, the unreachable memory becomes eligible to be freed automatically by the garbage collector. Something similar to a memory leak may still occur if a programmer's code holds a reference to an object that is no longer needed, typically when objects that are no longer needed are stored in containers that are still in use.[57] If methods for a non-existent object are called, a null pointer exception is thrown.[58][59]

One of the ideas behind Java's automatic memory management model is that programmers can be spared the burden of having to perform manual memory management. In some languages, memory for the creation of objects is implicitly allocated on the stack or explicitly allocated and deallocated from the heap. In the latter case, the responsibility of managing memory resides with the programmer. If the program does not deallocate an object, a memory leak occurs.[57] If the program attempts to access or deallocate memory that has already been deallocated, the result is undefined and difficult to predict, and the program is likely to become unstable or crash. This can be partially remedied by the use of smart pointers, but these add overhead and complexity. Garbage collection does not prevent logical memory leaks, i.e. those where the memory is still referenced but never used.[57]

Garbage collection may happen at any time. Ideally, it will occur when a program is idle. It is guaranteed to be triggered if there is insufficient free memory on the heap to allocate a new object; this can cause a program to stall momentarily. Explicit memory management is not possible in Java.

Java does not support C/C++ style pointer arithmetic, where object addresses can be arithmetically manipulated (e.g. by adding or subtracting an offset). This allows the garbage collector to relocate referenced objects and ensures type safety and security.

As in C++ and some other object-oriented languages, variables of Java's primitive data types are either stored directly in fields (for objects) or on the stack (for methods) rather than on the heap, as is commonly true for non-primitive data types (but see escape analysis). This was a conscious decision by Java's designers for performance reasons.

Java contains multiple types of garbage collectors. Since Java 9, HotSpot uses the Garbage First Garbage Collector (G1GC) as the default.[60] However, there are also several other garbage collectors that can be used to manage the heap, such as the Z Garbage Collector (ZGC) introduced in Java 11, and Shenandoah GC, introduced in Java 12 but unavailable in Oracle-produced OpenJDK builds. Shenandoah is instead available in third-party builds of OpenJDK, such as Eclipse Temurin. For most applications in Java, G1GC is sufficient. In prior versions of Java, such as Java 8, the Parallel Garbage Collector was used as the default garbage collector.

Having solved the memory management problem does not relieve the programmer of the burden of handling properly other kinds of resources, like network or database connections, file handles, etc., especially in the presence of exceptions.

Syntax

The syntax of Java is largely influenced by C++ and C. Unlike C++, which combines the syntax for structured, generic, and object-oriented programming, Java was built almost exclusively as an object-oriented language.[19] All code is written inside classes, and every data item is an object, with the exception of the primitive data types, (i.e. integers, floating-point numbers, boolean values, and characters), which are not objects for performance reasons. Java reuses some popular aspects of C++ (such as the printf method).

Unlike C++, Java does not support operator overloading[61] or multiple inheritance for classes, though multiple inheritance is supported for interfaces.[62]

Java uses comments similar to those of C++. There are three different styles of comments: a single line style marked with two slashes (//), a multiple line style opened with /* and closed with */, and the Javadoc commenting style opened with /** and closed with */. The Javadoc style of commenting allows the user to run the Javadoc executable to create documentation for the program and can be read by some integrated development environments (IDEs) such as Eclipse to allow developers to access documentation within the IDE.

Hello world

The following is a simple example of a "Hello, World!" program that writes a message to the standard output:

Special classes

Applet

Java applets were programs embedded in other applications, mainly in web pages displayed in web browsers. The Java applet API was deprecated with the release of Java 9 in 2017.[63][64]

Servlet

Java servlet technology provides Web developers with a simple, consistent mechanism for extending the functionality of a Web server and for accessing existing business systems. Servlets are server-side Java EE components that generate responses to requests from clients. Most of the time, this means generating HTML pages in response to HTTP requests, although there are a number of other standard servlet classes available, for example for WebSocket communication.

The Java servlet API has to some extent been superseded (but still used under the hood) by two standard Java technologies for web services:

the Java API for RESTful Web Services (JAX-RS 2.0) useful for AJAX, JSON and REST services, and
the Java API for XML Web Services (JAX-WS) useful for SOAP Web Services.

Typical implementations of these APIs on Application Servers or Servlet Containers use a standard servlet for handling all interactions with the HTTP requests and responses that delegate to the web service methods for the actual business logic.

JavaServer Pages

JavaServer Pages (JSP) are server-side Java EE components that generate responses, typically HTML pages, to HTTP requests from clients. JSPs embed Java code in an HTML page by using the special delimiters <% and %>. A JSP is compiled to a Java servlet, a Java application in its own right, the first time it is accessed. After that, the generated servlet creates the response.[65]

Swing application

Swing is a graphical user interface library for the Java SE platform. It is possible to specify a different look and feel through the pluggable look and feel system of Swing. Clones of Windows, GTK+, and Motif are supplied by Sun. Apple also provides an Aqua look and feel for macOS. Where prior implementations of these looks and feels may have been considered lacking, Swing in Java SE 6 addresses this problem by using more native GUI widget drawing routines of the underlying platforms.[66]

JavaFX application

JavaFX is a software platform for creating and delivering desktop applications, as well as rich web applications that can run across a wide variety of devices. JavaFX is intended to replace Swing as the standard graphical user interface (GUI) library for Java SE, but since JDK 11 JavaFX has not been in the core JDK and instead in a separate module.[67] JavaFX has support for desktop computers and web browsers on Microsoft Windows, Linux, and macOS. JavaFX does not have support for native OS look and feels.[68]

Generics

In 2004, generics were added to the Java language, as part of J2SE 5.0. Prior to the introduction of generics, each variable declaration had to be of a specific type. For container classes, for example, this is a problem because there is no easy way to create a container that accepts only specific types of objects. Either the container operates on all subtypes of a class or interface, usually Object, or a different container class has to be created for each contained class. Generics allow compile-time type checking without having to create many container classes, each containing almost identical code. In addition to enabling more efficient code, certain runtime exceptions are prevented from occurring, by issuing compile-time errors. If Java prevented all runtime type errors (ClassCastExceptions) from occurring, it would be type safe.

In 2016, the type system of Java was proven unsound in that it is possible to use generics to construct classes and methods that allow assignment of an instance of one class to a variable of another unrelated class. Such code is accepted by the compiler, but fails at run time with a class cast exception.[69]

Criticism

Criticisms directed at Java include the implementation of generics,[70] speed,[53] the handling of unsigned numbers,[71] the implementation of floating-point arithmetic,[72] and a history of security vulnerabilities in the primary Java VM implementation HotSpot.[73]
Developers have criticized the complexity and verbosity of the Java Persistence API (JPA), a standard part of Java EE. This has led to increased adoption of higher-level abstractions like Spring Data JPA, which aims to simplify database operations and reduce boilerplate code. The growing popularity of such frameworks suggests limitations in the standard JPA implementation's ease-of-use for modern Java development.[74]

Class libraries

The Java Class Library is the standard library, developed to support application development in Java. It is controlled by Oracle in cooperation with others through the Java Community Process program.[75] Companies or individuals participating in this process can influence the design and development of the APIs. This process has been a subject of controversy during the 2010s.[76] The class library contains features such as:

The core libraries, which include:
Input/output (I/O or IO)[77] and non-blocking I/O (NIO), or IO/NIO[78]
Networking[79] (new user agent (HTTP client) since Java 11[80])
Reflective programming (reflection)
Concurrent computing (concurrency)[77]
Generics
Scripting, Compiler
Functional programming (Lambda, streaming)
Collection libraries that implement data structures such as lists, dictionaries, trees, sets, queues and double-ended queue, or stacks[81]
XML Processing (Parsing, Transforming, Validating) libraries
Security[82]
Internationalization and localization libraries[83]
The integration libraries, which allow the application writer to communicate with external systems. These libraries include:
The Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) API for database access
Java Naming and Directory Interface (JNDI) for lookup and discovery
Java remote method invocation (RMI) and Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA) for distributed application development
Java Management Extensions (JMX) for managing and monitoring applications
User interface libraries, which include:
The (heavyweight, or native) Abstract Window Toolkit (AWT), which provides GUI components, the means for laying out those components and the means for handling events from those components
The (lightweight) Swing libraries, which are built on AWT but provide (non-native) implementations of the AWT widgetry
APIs for audio capture, processing, and playback
JavaFX
A platform dependent implementation of the Java virtual machine that is the means by which the bytecodes of the Java libraries and third-party applications are executed
Plugins, which enable applets to be run in web browsers
Java Web Start, which allows Java applications to be efficiently distributed to end users across the Internet
Licensing and documentation

Input/output (I/O or IO)[77] and non-blocking I/O (NIO), or IO/NIO[78]
Networking[79] (new user agent (HTTP client) since Java 11[80])
Reflective programming (reflection)
Concurrent computing (concurrency)[77]
Generics
Scripting, Compiler
Functional programming (Lambda, streaming)
Collection libraries that implement data structures such as lists, dictionaries, trees, sets, queues and double-ended queue, or stacks[81]
XML Processing (Parsing, Transforming, Validating) libraries
Security[82]
Internationalization and localization libraries[83]

The Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) API for database access
Java Naming and Directory Interface (JNDI) for lookup and discovery
Java remote method invocation (RMI) and Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA) for distributed application development
Java Management Extensions (JMX) for managing and monitoring applications

The (heavyweight, or native) Abstract Window Toolkit (AWT), which provides GUI components, the means for laying out those components and the means for handling events from those components
The (lightweight) Swing libraries, which are built on AWT but provide (non-native) implementations of the AWT widgetry
APIs for audio capture, processing, and playback
JavaFX

Documentation

Javadoc is a comprehensive documentation system, created by Sun Microsystems. It provides developers with an organized system for documenting their code. Javadoc comments have an extra asterisk at the beginning, i.e. the delimiters are /** and */, whereas the normal multi-line comments in Java are delimited by /* and */, and single-line comments start with //.[84]

Implementations

Oracle Corporation owns the official implementation of the Java SE platform, due to its acquisition of Sun Microsystems on January 27, 2010. This implementation is based on the original implementation of Java by Sun. The Oracle implementation is available for Windows, macOS, Linux, and Solaris. Because Java lacks any formal standardization recognized by Ecma International, ISO/IEC, ANSI, or other third-party standards organizations, the Oracle implementation is the de facto standard.

The Oracle implementation is packaged into two different distributions: The Java Runtime Environment (JRE) which contains the parts of the Java SE platform required to run Java programs and is intended for end users, and the Java Development Kit (JDK), which is intended for software developers and includes development tools such as the Java compiler, Javadoc, Jar, and a debugger. Oracle has also released GraalVM, a high performance Java dynamic compiler and interpreter.

OpenJDK is another Java SE implementation that is licensed under the GNU GPL. The implementation started when Sun began releasing the Java source code under the GPL. As of Java SE 7, OpenJDK is the official Java reference implementation.

The goal of Java is to make all implementations of Java compatible. Historically, Sun's trademark license for usage of the Java brand insists that all implementations be compatible. This resulted in a legal dispute with Microsoft after Sun claimed that the Microsoft implementation did not support Java remote method invocation (RMI) or Java Native Interface (JNI) and had added platform-specific features of their own. Sun sued in 1997, and, in 2001, won a settlement of US$20 million, as well as a court order enforcing the terms of the license from Sun.[85] As a result, Microsoft no longer ships Java with Windows.

Platform-independent Java is essential to Java EE, and an even more rigorous validation is required to certify an implementation. This environment enables portable server-side applications.

Use outside the Java platform

The Java programming language requires the presence of a software platform in order for compiled programs to be executed.

Oracle supplies the Java platform for use with Java. The Android SDK is an alternative software platform, used primarily for developing Android applications with its own GUI system.

Android

The Java language is a key pillar in Android, an open source mobile operating system. Although Android, built on the Linux kernel, is written largely in C, the Android SDK uses the Java language as the basis for Android applications but does not use any of its standard GUI, SE, ME or other established Java standards.[86] The bytecode language supported by the Android SDK is incompatible with Java bytecode and runs on its own virtual machine, optimized for low-memory devices such as smartphones and tablet computers. Depending on the Android version, the bytecode is either interpreted by the Dalvik virtual machine or compiled into native code by the Android Runtime.

Android does not provide the full Java SE standard library, although the Android SDK does include an independent implementation of a large subset of it. It supports Java 6 and some Java 7 features, offering an implementation compatible with the standard library (Apache Harmony).

The use of Java-related technology in Android led to a legal dispute between Oracle and Google. On May 7, 2012, a San Francisco jury found that if APIs could be copyrighted, then Google had infringed Oracle's copyrights by the use of Java in Android devices.[87] District Judge William Alsup ruled on May 31, 2012, that APIs cannot be copyrighted,[88] but this was reversed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in May 2014.[89] On May 26, 2016, the district court decided in favor of Google, ruling the copyright infringement of the Java API in Android constitutes fair use.[90] In March 2018, this ruling was overturned by the Appeals Court, which sent down the case of determining the damages to federal court in San Francisco.[91]
Google filed a petition for writ of certiorari with the Supreme Court of the United States in January 2019 to challenge the two rulings that were made by the Appeals Court in Oracle's favor.[92] On April 5, 2021, the Court ruled 6–2 in Google's favor, that its use of Java APIs should be considered fair use. However, the court refused to rule on the copyrightability of APIs, choosing instead to determine their ruling by considering Java's API copyrightable "purely for argument's sake."[93]

See also

Computer programming portal

C#
C++
Dalvik, used in old Android versions, replaced by non-JIT Android Runtime
Java Heterogeneous Distributed Computing
List of Java APIs
List of Java frameworks
List of JVM languages
List of Java virtual machines
Comparison of C# and Java
Comparison of Java and C++
Comparison of programming languages

References

^ Binstock, Andrew (May 20, 2015). "Java's 20 Years of Innovation". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016. Retrieved March 18, 2016.

^ "Oracle Releases Java 24".

^ "JDK 24".

^ a b c d Barbara Liskov with John Guttag (2000). Program Development in Java – Abstraction, Specification, and Object-Oriented Design. USA, Addison Wesley. ISBN 978-0-201-65768-5.

^ Chaudhary, Harry H. (July 28, 2014). "Cracking The Java Programming Interview :: 2000+ Java Interview Que/Ans". Archived from the original on September 29, 2023. Retrieved May 29, 2016.

^ Java 5.0 added several new language features (the enhanced for loop, autoboxing, varargs and annotations), after they were introduced in the similar (and competing) C# language. [1] Archived March 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine [2] Archived January 7, 2006, at the Wayback Machine

^ Gosling, James; McGilton, Henry (May 1996). "The Java Language Environment". Archived from the original on May 6, 2014. Retrieved May 6, 2014.

^ Gosling, James; Joy, Bill; Steele, Guy; Bracha, Gilad. "The Java Language Specification, 2nd Edition". Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved February 8, 2008.

^ "The A-Z of Programming Languages: Modula-3". Computerworld. Archived from the original on January 5, 2009. Retrieved June 9, 2010.

^ Niklaus Wirth stated on a number of public occasions, e.g. in a lecture at the Polytechnic Museum, Moscow in September 2005 (several independent first-hand accounts in Russian exist, e.g. one with an audio recording: Filippova, Elena (September 22, 2005). "Niklaus Wirth's lecture at the Polytechnic Museum in Moscow". Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved November 20, 2011.), that the Sun Java design team licensed the Oberon compiler sources a number of years prior to the release of Java and examined it: a (relative) compactness, type safety, garbage collection, no multiple inheritance for classes –  all these key overall design features are shared by Java and Oberon.

^ Patrick Naughton cites Objective-C as a strong influence on the design of the Java programming language, stating that notable direct derivatives include Java interfaces (derived from Objective-C's protocol) and primitive wrapper classes. [3] Archived July 13, 2011, at the Wayback Machine

^ TechMetrix Research (1999). "History of Java" (PDF). Java Application Servers Report. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 29, 2010. The project went ahead under the name green and the language was based on an old model of UCSD Pascal, which makes it possible to generate interpretive code.

^ "A Conversation with James Gosling". ACM Queue. Vol. 2, no. 5. Association for Computing Machinery. August 31, 2004. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2010.

^ The Java Language Team. About Microsoft's 'Delegates' (White Paper). JavaSoft, Sun Microsystems, Inc. Archived from the original on June 27, 2012. In the summer of 1996, Sun was designing the precursor to what is now the event model of the AWT and the JavaBeans component architecture. Borland contributed greatly to this process. We looked very carefully at Delphi Object Pascal and built a working prototype of bound method references in order to understand their interaction with the Java programming language and its APIs.

^ "Chapel spec (Acknowledgements)" (PDF). Cray Inc. October 1, 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 5, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2016.

^ "Gambas Documentation Introduction". Gambas Website. Archived from the original on October 9, 2017. Retrieved October 9, 2017.

^ "Facebook Q&A: Hack brings static typing to PHP world". InfoWorld. March 26, 2014. Archived from the original on February 13, 2015. Retrieved January 11, 2015.

^ "Write once, run anywhere?". Computer Weekly. May 2, 2002. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved July 27, 2009.

^ a b c "1.2 Design Goals of the Java Programming Language". Oracle. January 1, 1999. Archived from the original on January 23, 2013. Retrieved January 14, 2013.

^ Melanson, Mike (August 9, 2022). "Don't call it a comeback: Why Java is still champ". GitHub. Archived from the original on August 25, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023.

^ "The top programming languages". The State of the Octoverse. GitHub. Archived from the original on August 2, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023.

^ McMillan, Robert (August 1, 2013). "Is Java Losing Its Mojo?". Wired. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2023.

^ Byous, Jon (c. 1998). "Java technology: The early years". Sun Developer Network. Sun Microsystems. Archived from the original on April 20, 2005. Retrieved April 22, 2005.

^ Object-oriented programming "The History of Java Technology". Sun Developer Network. c. 1995. Archived from the original on February 10, 2010. Retrieved April 30, 2010.

^ Murphy, Kieron (October 4, 1996). "So why did they decide to call it Java?". JavaWorld. Archived from the original on July 13, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2020.

^ Kabutz, Heinz; Once Upon an Oak Archived April 13, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Artima. Retrieved April 29, 2007.

^ "JAVASOFT SHIPS JAVA 1.0". Archived from the original on March 10, 2007. Retrieved May 13, 2018.

^ Object-oriented Programming with Java: Essentials and Applications. Tata McGraw-Hill Education. p. 34.

^ "JSG – Java Study Group". open-std.org. Archived from the original on August 25, 2006. Retrieved August 2, 2006.

^ "Why Java Was – Not – Standardized Twice" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on January 13, 2014. Retrieved June 3, 2018.

^ "What is ECMA—and why Microsoft cares". ZDNet. Archived from the original on May 6, 2014. Retrieved May 6, 2014.

^ "Java Community Process website". Jcp.org. May 24, 2010. Archived from the original on August 8, 2006. Retrieved June 9, 2010.

^ "JAVAONE: Sun – The bulk of Java is open sourced". GrnLight.net. Archived from the original on May 27, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2014.

^ "Sun's Evolving Role as Java Evangelist". O'Reilly Media. Archived from the original on September 15, 2010. Retrieved August 2, 2009.

^ "Oracle and Java". oracle.com. Oracle Corporation. Archived from the original on January 31, 2010. Retrieved August 23, 2010. Oracle has been a leading and substantive supporter of Java since its emergence in 1995 and takes on the new role as steward of Java technology with a relentless commitment to fostering a community of participation and transparency.

^ Gosling, James (April 9, 2010). "Time to move on..." On a New Road. Archived from the original on November 5, 2010. Retrieved November 16, 2011.

^ Topic, Dalibor. "Moving to a Plugin-Free Web". Archived from the original on March 16, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2016.

^ "Learn About Java Technology". Oracle. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011. Retrieved November 21, 2011.

^ "Why should I uninstall older versions of Java from my system?". Oracle. Archived from the original on February 12, 2018. Retrieved September 24, 2021.

^ "Oracle Java SE Support Roadmap". Oracle. September 13, 2021. Archived from the original on September 19, 2021. Retrieved September 18, 2021.

^ "Temurin™ Support; Adoptium". adoptium.net. Archived from the original on March 29, 2024. Retrieved March 29, 2024.

^ "JAVASOFT SHIPS JAVA 1.0". sun.com. Archived from the original on March 10, 2007. Retrieved February 5, 2008.

^ Chander, Sharat. "Introducing Java SE 11". oracle.com. Archived from the original on September 26, 2018. Retrieved September 26, 2018.

^ Chander, Sharat (September 15, 2020). "The Arrival of Java 15!". Oracle. Archived from the original on September 16, 2020. Retrieved September 15, 2020.

^ "JDK 21". openjdk.org. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved September 20, 2023.

^ "JDK 24".

^ "Java Card Overview". Oracle Technology Network. Oracle. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2014.

^ "Java Platform, Micro Edition (Java ME)". Oracle Technology Network. Oracle. Archived from the original on January 4, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2014.

^ "Java SE". Oracle Technology Network. Oracle. Archived from the original on December 24, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014.

^ "Java Platform, Enterprise Edition (Java EE)". Oracle Technology Network. Oracle. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014.

^ "Deep Dive Into the New Java JIT Compiler – Graal | Baeldung". www.baeldung.com. August 6, 2021. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved October 13, 2021.

^ "Is the JVM (Java Virtual Machine) platform dependent or platform independent? What is the advantage of using the JVM, and having Java be a translated language?". Programmer Interview. Archived from the original on January 19, 2015. Retrieved January 19, 2015.

^ a b Jelovic, Dejan. "Why Java will always be slower than C++". Archived from the original on February 11, 2008. Retrieved February 15, 2008.

^ Hundt, Robert. "Loop Recognition in C++/Java/Go/Scala" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved July 12, 2012.

^ "Symantec's Just-In-Time Java Compiler To Be Integrated into Sun JDK 1.1". Archived from the original on June 28, 2010. Retrieved August 1, 2009.

^ Salcic, Zoran; Park, Heejong; Teich, Jürgen; Malik, Avinash; Nadeem, Muhammad (July 22, 2017). "Noc-HMP: A Heterogeneous Multicore Processor for Embedded Systems Designed in SystemJ". ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems. 22 (4): 73. doi:10.1145/3073416. ISSN 1084-4309. S2CID 11150290.

^ a b c Bloch 2018, p. 26-28, §Item 7: Eliminate obsolete object references.

^ "NullPointerException". Oracle. Archived from the original on May 6, 2014. Retrieved May 6, 2014.

^ "Exceptions in Java". Artima.com. Archived from the original on January 21, 2009. Retrieved August 10, 2010.

^ "Java HotSpot™ Virtual Machine Performance Enhancements". Oracle.com. Archived from the original on May 29, 2017. Retrieved April 26, 2017.

^ "Operator Overloading (C# vs Java)". C# for Java Developers. Microsoft. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2014.

^ "Multiple Inheritance of State, Implementation, and Type". The Java Tutorials. Oracle. Archived from the original on November 9, 2014. Retrieved December 10, 2014.

^ "Deprecated APIs, Features, and Options". Oracle. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019. Retrieved May 31, 2019.

^ "Applet (Java Platform SE 7)". Docs. Oracle. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2020.

^ "What Is a JSP Page? - The Java EE 5 Tutorial". docs.oracle.com. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2020.

^ "Trail: Creating a GUI With JFC/Swing (The Java Tutorials)". docs.oracle.com. Archived from the original on April 29, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2020.

^ "Removed from JDK 11, JavaFX 11 arrives as a standalone module". InfoWorld. September 20, 2018. Archived from the original on October 14, 2020. Retrieved October 13, 2020.

^ "Getting Started with JavaFX: Hello World, JavaFX Style". JavaFX 2 Tutorials and Documentation. Oracle. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2020.

^ "Java and Scala's Type Systems are Unsound" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on November 28, 2016. Retrieved February 20, 2017.

^ Arnold, Ken (June 27, 2005). "Generics Considered Harmful". java.net. Archived from the original on October 10, 2007. Retrieved September 10, 2015.

^ Owens, Sean R. "Java and unsigned int, unsigned short, unsigned byte, unsigned long, etc. (Or rather, the lack thereof)". Archived from the original on February 20, 2009. Retrieved July 4, 2011.

^ Kahan, William (March 1, 1998). "How Java's Floating-Point Hurts Everyone Everywhere – ACM 1998 Workshop on Java (Stanford)" (PDF). Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, University of California at Berkeley. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 5, 2012. Retrieved June 4, 2011.

^ "Have you checked the Java?". Archived from the original on September 21, 2012. Retrieved December 23, 2011.

^ Chidester, Ashlan. Java Persistence API, Jenkins and AWS. ISBN 9798224253951. Retrieved September 16, 2024.

^ Cadenhead, Rogers (November 20, 2017), Understanding How Java Programs Work, archived from the original on August 13, 2021, retrieved March 26, 2019

^ Woolf, Nicky (May 26, 2016). "Google wins six-year legal battle with Oracle over Android code copyright". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on March 26, 2019. Retrieved March 26, 2019.

^ a b Bloch 2018, pp. 1–4, § 1 Introduction.

^ "java.nio (Java Platform SE 8)". docs.oracle.com.

^ "Java Networking". docs.oracle.com.

^ "HttpClient (Java SE 11 & JDK 11)". docs.oracle.com.

^ "Collections Framework Overview". Java Documentation. Oracle. Archived from the original on December 31, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014.

^ "Java Security Overview". Java Documentation. Oracle. Archived from the original on January 3, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2014.

^ "Trail: Internationalization". The Java Tutorials. Oracle. Archived from the original on December 31, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014.

^ "How to Write Doc Comments for the Javadoc Tool". Oracle Technology Network. Oracle. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014.

^ Niccolai, James (January 24, 2001). "Sun, Microsoft settle Java lawsuit". JavaWorld. IDG News Service. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2020.

^ van Gurp, Jilles (November 13, 2007). "Google Android: Initial Impressions and Criticism". Javalobby. Archived from the original on August 28, 2008. Retrieved March 7, 2009. Frankly, I don't understand why Google intends to ignore the vast amount of existing implementation out there. It seems like a bad case of "not invented here" to me. Ultimately, this will slow adoption. There are already too many Java platforms for the mobile world and this is yet another one

^ Mullin, Joe (May 7, 2012). "Google guilty of infringement in Oracle trial; future legal headaches loom". Law & Disorder. Ars Technica. Archived from the original on May 8, 2012. Retrieved May 8, 2012.

^ Mullin, Joe (May 31, 2012). "Google wins crucial API ruling, Oracle's case decimated". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved June 1, 2012.

^ Rosenblatt, Seth (May 9, 2014). "Court sides with Oracle over Android in Java patent appeal". CNET. Archived from the original on May 10, 2014. Retrieved May 10, 2014.

^ Mullin, Joe (May 26, 2016). "Google beats Oracle—Android makes "fair use" of Java APIs". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on January 20, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2016.

^ Farivar, Cyrus (March 27, 2018). ""Google's use of the Java API packages was not fair," appeals court rules". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on September 24, 2019. Retrieved August 6, 2019.

^ Lee, Timothy (April 23, 2019). "Google asks Supreme Court to overrule disastrous ruling on API copyrights". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on April 23, 2019. Retrieved April 23, 2019.

^ "Google LLC v. Oracle America, Inc 593 U. S. ____ (2021)" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on April 5, 2021. Retrieved April 6, 2021.

Bibliography

Bloch, Joshua (2018). Effective Java: Programming Language Guide (Third ed.). Addison-Wesley. ISBN 978-0-13-468599-1.
Gosling, James; Joy, Bill; Steele, Guy L. Jr.; Bracha, Gilad (2005). The Java Language Specification (3rd ed.). Addison-Wesley. ISBN 0-321-24678-0. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2019.
Gosling, James; Joy, Bill; Steele, Guy; Bracha, Gilad; Buckley, Alex (2014). The Java® Language Specification (PDF) (Java SE 8 ed.). Archived (PDF) from the original on October 21, 2014. Retrieved November 18, 2014.
Lindholm, Tim; Yellin, Frank (1999). The Java Virtual Machine Specification (2nd ed.). Addison-Wesley. ISBN 0-201-43294-3. Archived from the original on September 25, 2011. Retrieved February 8, 2019.

External links

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityData from Wikidata

OpenJDK, Oracle
JDK builds, Adoptium

vte

JVM
Java ME (Micro)
Java SE (Standard)
Jakarta EE (Enterprise)
Java Card
Android SDK
GraalVM

Squawk
Java Development Kit
OpenJDK
Java virtual machine
JavaFX
Maxine VM

Applets
Servlets
MIDlets
JSP
JSF
Web Start (JNLP)
Pack200
Modules

Blackdown
Eclipse
GNU Classpath
GWT
Harmony
Hibernate
IcedTea
Jazelle
Spring
Struts
TopLink
WildFly

Java version history
Java Community Process
Sun Microsystems
Free Java implementations

Java
BeanShell
Clojure
Groovy
JRuby
Jython
Kotlin
Processing
Rhino
Scala
Oxygene

JavaOne
Devoxx

Apache Software Foundation
Eclipse Foundation
Java Community Process
Oracle Corporation
Sun Microsystems, Sun Microsystems Laboratories

James Gosling
Arthur van Hoff
Urs Hölzle
Patrick Naughton

vte

Sun-1
Sun-2
Sun-3
Sun386i
Sun-4
SPARCstation/server/center
1
2
4
5
10
20
IPC
IPX
LX
ZX
SPARCclassic
Netra
Ultra
1
2
5
10
24
30
60
80
Enterprise
10000
Blade server
Blade workstation
Fire
12K
15K
E25K
T2000
X4500
SPARC Enterprise
JavaStation
Java Workstation
Ray
Cobalt Qube
Cobalt RaQ

1
2
4
5
10
20
IPC
IPX
LX
ZX

1
2
5
10
24
30
60
80

10000

12K
15K
E25K
T2000
X4500

SPARC
MB86900
microSPARC
SuperSPARC
UltraSPARC
UltraSPARC II
UltraSPARC IIe
UltraSPARC IIi
Gemini
UltraSPARC III
UltraSPARC III Cu
UltraSPARC IIIi
UltraSPARC IV
UltraSPARC T1
UltraSPARC T2
SPARC T3
SPARC T4
SPARC T5
Rock
MAJC

UltraSPARC IIe
UltraSPARC IIi
Gemini

UltraSPARC III Cu
UltraSPARC IIIi

Sun4d
SBus
Fireplane
LOM port
MBus
Modular Datacenter
Neptune
System Service Processor
SPARC T series
SPOT
Ultra Port Architecture
Visual Instruction Set

SunOS
Solaris
NIS
NIS+
NFS
ZFS
ZFS+
SunView
NeWS
OpenWindows
Java Desktop System
Studio
Java
StarOffice
iPlanet
Java System
Sun Secure Global Desktop
MySQL
xVM
GlassFish
VirtualBox

NIS+

ZFS+

StorageTek 5800 System
StorageTek SL8500
Open Storage
QFS
ZFS

Cloud
Constellation System
Visualization System
Grid Engine
Lustre

Sun Microsystems Laboratories
picoJava
Fortress
Project Looking Glass

BlueJ
Global Education & Learning Community
SCPs

Common Development and Distribution License
Java Community Process
NetBeans
OpenOffice.org
OpenSolaris
OpenSPARC
OpenJDK
Open Source University Meetup

Bill Joy
Andy Bechtolsheim
Scott McNealy
Vinod Khosla

Afara Websystems
Cobalt Networks
Gridware
Lighthouse Design
Montalvo Systems
MySQL AB
Pixo
Procom Technology
SavaJe
StorageTek
Tarantella

The Network is the Computer
Write once, run anywhere

vte

Jeffrey Berg
H. Raymond Bingham
Michael Boskin
Safra Catz
Larry Ellison
Héctor García-Molina
Joseph Grundfest
Jeffrey O. Henley
Mark Hurd
Jack F. Kemp
Donald L. Lucas
Naomi O. Seligman

Sun
PeopleSoft
Hyperion
Siebel
BEA
JD Edwards
RightNow
Virtual Iron
TimesTen
Sunopsis
NetSuite
Cerner

Oracle Database
MySQL
InnoDB
Berkeley DB
TimesTen
Rdb
Essbase

Java
PL/SQL

JDeveloper
Forms
NetBeans
Apex
SQL Developer
Developer Studio

Fusion Middleware
WebCenter
SOA Suite
WebLogic Server
Coherence
Tuxedo
GlassFish

Oracle Linux
Oracle Solaris

Sun Fire
SPARC (T-Series, Enterprise)
StorageTek

Oracle Exadata
Oracle Exalogic
Big Data Appliance

Oracle Certification Program

Category

vte

OpenOffice.org
VirtualBox

Java

Berkeley DB
InnoDB
MySQL
Oracle NoSQL Database

DTrace
GlassFish
HotSpot
Image Packaging System
Java (software platform)
Maxine Virtual Machine
Memory
Nashorn
NetBeans
OpenJDK
VisualVM

OpenSolaris
Oracle Linux

Java Desktop System
OCFS2
Oracle Grid Engine
Oracle VM Server for x86

Google LLC v. Oracle America, Inc.

vte

Comparison
Timeline
History

Ada
ALGOL
Simula
APL
Assembly
BASIC
Visual Basic
classic
.NET
C
C++
C#
COBOL
Erlang
Elixir
Forth
Fortran
Go
Haskell
Java
JavaScript
Julia
Kotlin
Lisp
Lua
MATLAB
ML
Caml 
OCaml
Pascal
Object Pascal
Perl 
Raku
PHP
Prolog
Python
R
Ruby
Rust
SAS
SQL
Scratch
Shell
Smalltalk
Swift
more...

Simula

Visual Basic
classic
.NET

classic
.NET

Elixir

Caml 
OCaml

OCaml

Object Pascal

Raku

Lists: Alphabetical
Categorical
Generational
Non-English-based
 Category

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataCzech RepublicSpainIsrael

ELMCIP

vte

Inferno (Hell)
Purgatorio (Purgatory)
Paradiso (Heaven)

The Divine Comedy (Italian: Divina Commedia [diˈviːna komˈmɛːdja]) is an Italian narrative poem by Dante Alighieri, begun c. 1308 and completed around 1321, shortly before the author's death. It is widely considered the pre-eminent work in Italian literature[1] and one of the greatest works of Western literature. The poem's imaginative vision of the afterlife is representative of the medieval worldview as it existed in the Western Church by the 14th century. It helped establish the Tuscan language, in which it is written, as the standardized Italian language.[2] It is divided into three parts: Inferno, Purgatorio, and Paradiso.

The poem discusses "the state of the soul after death and presents an image of divine justice meted out as due punishment or reward",[3] and describes Dante's travels through Hell, Purgatory, and Heaven. Allegorically, the poem represents the soul's journey towards God, beginning with the recognition and rejection of sin (Inferno), followed by the penitent Christian life (Purgatorio), which is then followed by the soul's ascent to God (Paradiso). Dante draws on medieval Catholic theology and philosophy, especially Thomistic philosophy derived from the Summa Theologica of Thomas Aquinas.

In the poem, the pilgrim Dante is accompanied by three guides: Virgil, who represents human reason, and who guides him for all of Inferno and most of Purgatorio; Beatrice, who represents divine revelation[4] in addition to theology, grace, and faith; and guides him from the end of Purgatorio onwards; and Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, who represents contemplative mysticism and devotion to Mary the Mother, guiding him in the final cantos of Paradiso.

The work was originally simply titled Comedìa (pronounced [komeˈdiːa], Tuscan for "Comedy") – so also in the first printed edition, published in 1472 – later adjusted to the modern Italian Commedia. The adjective Divina was added by Giovanni Boccaccio,[5] owing to its subject matter and lofty style, and the first edition to name the poem Divina Comedia in the title was that of the Venetian humanist Lodovico Dolce,[6] published in 1555 by Gabriele Giolito de' Ferrari.

Structure and story

The Divine Comedy is composed of 14,233 lines that are divided into three cantiche (singular cantica) – Inferno (Hell), Purgatorio (Purgatory), and Paradiso (Paradise) – each consisting of 33 cantos (Italian plural canti). An initial canto, serving as an introduction to the poem and generally considered to be part of the first cantica, brings the total number of cantos to 100. It is generally accepted, however, that the first two cantos serve as a unitary prologue to the entire epic, and that the opening two cantos of each cantica serve as prologues to each of the three cantiche.[7][8][9]

The number three is prominent in the work, represented in part by the number of cantiche and their lengths. Additionally, the verse scheme used, terza rima, is hendecasyllabic (lines of eleven syllables), with the lines composing tercets according to the rhyme scheme ABA BCB CDC DED ...[10] The total number of syllables in each tercet is thus 33, the same as the number of cantos in each cantica.

Written in the first person, the poem tells of Dante's journey through the three realms of the dead, lasting from the night before Good Friday to the Wednesday after Easter in the spring of 1300. The Roman poet Virgil guides him through Hell and Purgatory; Beatrice, Dante's ideal woman, guides him through Heaven.[11] Beatrice was a Florentine woman he had met in childhood and admired from afar in the mode of the then-fashionable courtly love tradition, which is highlighted in Dante's earlier work La Vita Nuova.[12] The Cistercian abbot Bernard of Clairvaux guides Dante through the last three cantos.[13]

The structure of the three realms follows a common numerical pattern of 9 plus 1, for a total of 10. There are nine  circles of the Inferno, followed by Lucifer contained at its bottom; nine rings of Mount Purgatory, followed by the Garden of Eden crowning its summit; and the nine celestial bodies of Paradiso, followed by the Empyrean containing the very essence of God. Within each group of nine, seven elements correspond to a specific moral scheme, subdivided into three subcategories, while two others of greater particularity are added to total nine. For example, the seven deadly sins that are cleansed in Purgatory are joined by special realms for the late repentant and the excommunicated. The core seven sins within Purgatory correspond to a moral scheme of love perverted, subdivided into three groups corresponding to excessive love (Lust, Gluttony, Greed), deficient love (Sloth), and malicious love (Wrath, Envy, Pride).[14]

In central Italy's political struggle between Guelphs and Ghibellines, Dante was part of the Guelphs, who in general favoured the papacy over the Holy Roman Emperor. Florence's Guelphs split into factions around 1300 – the White Guelphs and the Black Guelphs. Dante was among the White Guelphs who were exiled in 1302 by the Lord-Mayor Cante de' Gabrielli di Gubbio, after troops under Charles of Valois entered the city, at the request of Pope Boniface VIII, who supported the Black Guelphs. This exile, which lasted the rest of Dante's life, shows its influence in many parts of the Comedy, from prophecies of Dante's exile to Dante's views of politics, to the eternal damnation of some of his opponents.[15]

The last word in each of the three cantiche is stelle ("stars").

Inferno

The poem begins on the night before Good Friday in the year 1300, "halfway along our life's path" (Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita). Dante is thirty-five years old, half of the biblical lifespan of seventy (Psalms 89:10, Vulgate), lost in a dark wood (understood as sin),[16][17][18] assailed by beasts (a lion, a leopard, and a she-wolf) he cannot evade and unable to find the "straight way" (diritta via) to salvation (symbolised by the sun behind the mountain). Conscious that he is ruining himself and that he is falling into a "low place" (basso loco) where the sun is silent ('l sol tace), Dante is at last rescued by Virgil, and the two of them begin their journey to the underworld. Each sin's punishment in Inferno is a contrapasso, a symbolic instance of poetic justice; for example, in Canto XX, fortune-tellers and soothsayers must walk with their heads on backwards, unable to see what is ahead, because that was what they had tried to do in life:

they had their faces twisted toward their haunches
and found it necessary to walk backward,
because they could not see ahead of them.
... and since he wanted so to see ahead,
he looks behind and walks a backward path.[19]

Allegorically, the Inferno represents the Christian soul seeing sin for what it really is, and the three beasts represent three types of sin: the self-indulgent, the violent, and the malicious.[20] These three types of sin also provide the three main divisions of Dante's Hell: Upper Hell, outside the city of Dis, for the four sins of indulgence (lust, gluttony, avarice, anger); Circle 7 for the sins of violence against one's neighbor, against oneself, and against God, art, and nature; and Circles 8 and 9 for the sins of fraud and treachery. Added to these are two dissimilar, spiritual categories: Limbo, in Circle 1, contains the virtuous pagans who were not sinful but were ignorant of Christ, and Circle 6 contains the heretics who contradicted the doctrine and confused the spirit of Christ.[21]

Purgatorio

Having survived the depths of Hell, Dante and Virgil ascend out of the undergloom to the Mountain of Purgatory on the far side of the world. The Mountain is on an island, the only land in the Southern Hemisphere, created by the displacement of rock which resulted when Satan's fall created Hell[22] (which Dante portrays as existing underneath Jerusalem[23]). The mountain has seven terraces, corresponding to the seven deadly sins or "seven roots of sinfulness".[24] The classification of sin here is more psychological than that of the Inferno, being based on motives, rather than actions. It is also drawn primarily from Christian theology, rather than from classical sources.[25] However, Dante's illustrative examples of sin and virtue draw on classical sources as well as on the Bible and on contemporary events.

Love, a theme throughout the Divine Comedy, is particularly important for the framing of sin on the Mountain of Purgatory. While the love that flows from God is pure, it can become sinful as it flows through humanity. Humans can sin by using love towards improper or malicious ends (Wrath, Envy, Pride), or using it to proper ends but with love that is either not strong enough (Sloth) or love that is too strong (Lust, Gluttony, Greed). Below the seven purges of the soul is the Ante-Purgatory, containing the Excommunicated from the church and the Late repentant who died, often violently, before receiving rites. Thus the total comes to nine, with the addition of the Garden of Eden at the summit, equaling ten.[26]

Allegorically, the Purgatorio represents the Christian life. Christian souls arrive escorted by an angel, singing In exitu Israel de Aegypto. In his letter to Cangrande (the authenticity of which is disputed[27]), Dante explains that this reference to Israel leaving Egypt refers both to the redemption of Christ and to "the conversion of the soul from the sorrow and misery of sin to the state of grace."[28] Appropriately, therefore, it is Easter Sunday when Dante and Virgil arrive.

The Purgatorio demonstrates the medieval knowledge of a spherical Earth. During the poem, Dante discusses the different stars visible in the southern hemisphere, the altered position of the sun, and the various time zones of the Earth. At this stage it is, Dante says, sunset at Jerusalem, midnight on the River Ganges, and sunrise in Purgatory.

Paradiso

After an initial ascension, Beatrice guides Dante through the nine celestial spheres of Heaven. These are concentric and spherical, as in Aristotelian and Ptolemaic cosmology. While the structures of the Inferno and Purgatorio were based on different classifications of sin, the structure of the Paradiso is based on the four cardinal virtues and the three theological virtues.

The seven lowest spheres of Heaven deal solely with the cardinal virtues of Prudence, Fortitude, Justice and Temperance. The first three spheres involve a deficiency of one of the cardinal virtues – the Moon, containing the inconstant, whose vows to God waned as the moon and thus lack fortitude; Mercury, containing the ambitious, who were virtuous for glory and thus lacked justice; and Venus, containing the lovers, whose love was directed towards another than God and thus lacked temperance. The final four incidentally are positive examples of the cardinal virtues, all led on by the Sun, containing the prudent, whose wisdom lighted the way for the other virtues, to which the others are bound (constituting a category on its own). Mars contains the men of fortitude who died in the cause of Christianity; Jupiter contains the kings of justice; and Saturn contains the temperate, the monks. The seven subdivided into three are raised further by two more categories: the eighth sphere of the fixed stars that contain those who achieved the theological virtues of faith, hope, and love, and represent the Church Triumphant – the total perfection of humanity, cleansed of all the sins and carrying all the virtues of heaven; and the ninth circle, or Primum Mobile (corresponding to the geocentricism of medieval astronomy), which contains the angels, creatures never poisoned by original sin. Topping them all is the Empyrean, which contains the essence of God, completing the nine-fold division to ten.

Dante meets and converses with several great saints of the Church, including Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventure, Saint Peter, and St. John. Near the end, Beatrice departs and Bernard of Clairvaux takes over as the guide.[29] The Paradiso is more theological in nature than the Inferno and the Purgatorio. However, Dante admits that the vision of heaven he receives is merely the one his human eyes permit him to see, and thus Dante's personal vision.

The Divine Comedy finishes with Dante seeing the Triune God. In a flash of understanding that he cannot express, Dante finally understands the mystery of Christ's divinity and humanity, and his soul becomes aligned with God's love:[30]

But already my desire and my will
were being turned like a wheel, all at one speed,
by the Love which moves the sun and the other stars.[31]

History

Manuscripts

According to the Italian Dante Society, no original manuscript written by Dante has survived, although there are many manuscript copies from the 14th and 15th centuries – some 800 are listed on their site.[32]

Early translations

Coluccio Salutati translated some quotations from the Comedy into Latin for his De fato et fortuna in 1396–1397. The first complete translation of the Comedy was made into Latin prose by Giovanni da Serravalle in 1416 for two English bishops, Robert Hallam and Nicholas Bubwith, and an Italian cardinal, Amedeo di Saluzzo. It was made during the Council of Constance. The first verse translation, into Latin hexameters, was made in 1427–1431 by Matteo Ronto [fr].[33]

The first translation of the Comedy into another vernacular was the prose translation into Castilian completed by Enrique de Villena in 1428. The first vernacular verse translation was that of Andreu Febrer into Catalan in 1429.[3]

Early printed editions

The first printed edition was published in Foligno, Italy, by Johann Numeister and Evangelista Angelini da Trevi on 11 April 1472.[34] Of the 300 copies printed, fourteen still survive. The original printing press is on display in the Oratorio della Nunziatella in Foligno.

Thematic concerns

The Divine Comedy can be described simply as an allegory: each canto, and the episodes therein, can contain many alternative meanings. Dante's allegory, however, is more complex, and, in explaining how to read the poem (see the Letter to Cangrande)[35] he outlines other levels of meaning besides the allegory: the historical, the moral, the literal, and the anagogical.

The structure of the poem is also quite complex, with mathematical and numerological patterns distributed throughout the work, particularly threes and nines. The poem is often lauded for its particularly human qualities: Dante's skillful delineation of the characters he encounters in Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise; his bitter denunciations of Florentine and Italian politics; and his powerful poetic imagination. Dante's use of real characters, according to Dorothy Sayers in her introduction to her translation of the Inferno, allows Dante the freedom of not having to involve the reader in description, and allows him to "[make] room in his poem for the discussion of a great many subjects of the utmost importance, thus widening its range and increasing its variety."[36]

Dante called the poem "Comedy" (the adjective "Divine" was added later, in the 16th century) because poems in the ancient world were classified as High ("Tragedy") or Low ("Comedy").[37] Low poems had happy endings and were written in everyday language, whereas High poems treated more serious matters and were written in an elevated style. Dante was one of the first in the Middle Ages to write of a serious subject, the Redemption of humanity, in the low and "vulgar" Italian language and not the Latin one might expect for such a serious topic. Boccaccio's account that an early version of the poem was begun by Dante in Latin is still controversial.[38][39]

Scientific themes

Although the Divine Comedy is primarily a religious poem, discussing sin, virtue, and theology, Dante also discusses several elements of the science of his day (this mixture of science with poetry has received both praise and criticism over the centuries).[40] The Purgatorio repeatedly refers to the implications of a spherical Earth, such as the different stars visible in the southern hemisphere, the altered position of the sun, and the various time zones of the Earth. For example, at sunset in Purgatory it is midnight at the Ebro, dawn in Jerusalem, and noon on the River Ganges:[41]

Just as, there where its Maker shed His blood,
the sun shed its first rays, and Ebro lay
beneath high Libra, and the ninth hour's rays

were scorching Ganges' waves; so here, the sun
stood at the point of day's departure when
God's angel – happy – showed himself to us.[42]

Dante travels through the centre of the Earth in the Inferno, and comments on the resulting change in the direction of gravity in Canto XXXIV (lines 76–120). A little earlier (XXXIII, 102–105), he queries the existence of wind in the frozen inner circle of hell, since it has no temperature differentials.[43]

Inevitably, given its setting, the Paradiso discusses astronomy extensively, but in the Ptolemaic sense. The Paradiso also discusses the importance of the experimental method in science, with a detailed example in lines 94–105 of Canto II:

A briefer example occurs in Canto XV of the Purgatorio (lines 16–21), where Dante points out that both theory and experiment confirm that the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Other references to science in the Paradiso include descriptions of clockwork in Canto XXIV (lines 13–18), and Thales' theorem about triangles in Canto XIII (lines 101–102).

Galileo Galilei is known to have lectured on the Inferno, and it has been suggested that the poem may have influenced some of Galileo's own ideas regarding mechanics.[45]

Influences

Italo-Dalmatian languages
Tuscan (Florentine)
Regional Italian
Accademia della Crusca
Enciclopedia Treccani

Veronese Riddle
Placiti Cassinesi
Sicilian School
Dolce Stil Novo
The Divine Comedy
Pontifical Academy of Arcadia
Italian Purism
The Last Letters of Jacopo Ortis
The Betrothed

Culture
Literature
Music
Philosophy
Poetry
Comics
Italophilia

Verb conjugation

Orthography
Braille

Syntactic gemination
Tuscan gorgia

vte

Classical

Without access to the works of Homer, Dante used Virgil, Lucan, Ovid, and Statius as the models for the style, history, and mythology of the Comedy.[46] This is most obvious in the case of Virgil, who appears as a mentor character throughout the first two canticles and who has his epic, the Aeneid, praised with language Dante reserves elsewhere for Scripture.[47] Ovid is given less explicit praise in the poem, but besides Virgil, Dante uses Ovid as a source more than any other poet, mostly through metaphors and fantastical episodes based on those in the Metamorphoses.[48] Less influential than either of the two are Statius and Lucan, the latter of whom has only been given proper recognition as a source in the Divine Comedy in the twentieth century.[49]

Besides Dante's fellow poets, the classical figure that most influenced the Comedy is Aristotle. Dante built up the philosophy of the Comedy with the works of Aristotle as a foundation, just as the scholastics used Aristotle as the basis for their thinking. Dante knew Aristotle directly from Latin translations of his works and indirectly from quotations in the works of Albertus Magnus.[50] Dante even acknowledges Aristotle's influence explicitly in the poem, specifically when Virgil justifies the Inferno's structure by citing the Nicomachean Ethics.[51] In the same canto, Virgil draws on Cicero's De Officiis to explain why sins of the intellect are worse than sins of violence, a key point that would be explored from canto XVIII to the end of the Inferno.[52]

Christian

The Divine Comedy's language is often derived from the phraseology of the Vulgate. This was the only translation of the Bible Dante had access to, as it was one the vast majority of scribes were willing to copy during the Middle Ages. This includes five hundred or so direct quotes and references Dante derives from the Bible (or his memory of it). Dante also treats the Bible as a final authority on any matter, including on subjects scripture only approaches allegorically.[53]

The Divine Comedy is also a product of Scholasticism, especially as expressed by St. Thomas Aquinas.[54][55] This influence is most pronounced in the Paradiso, where the text's portrayals of God, the beatific vision, and substantial forms all align with scholastic doctrine.[56] It is also in the Paradiso that Aquinas and fellow scholastic St. Bonaventure appear as characters, introducing Dante to all of Heaven's wisest souls. Consequently, the Divine Comedy has been called "the Summa in verse".[57] Despite all this, there are issues on which Dante diverges from the scholastic doctrine, such as in his unbridled praise for poetry.[58]

The Apocalypse of Peter is one of the earliest examples of a Christian-Jewish katabasis, a genre of explicit depictions of heaven and hell. Later works inspired by it include the Apocalypse of Thomas in the 2nd–4th century, and more importantly, the Apocalypse of Paul in the 4th century. Despite a lack of "official" approval, the Apocalypse of Paul would go on to be popular for centuries, possibly due to its popularity among the medieval monks that copied and preserved manuscripts in the turbulent centuries following the fall of the Western Roman Empire. The Divine Comedy belongs to the same genre[59] and was influenced by the Apocalypse of Paul.[60][61]

Islamic

Dante lived in a Europe of substantial literary and philosophical contact with the Muslim world, encouraged by such factors as Averroism ("Averrois, che'l gran comento feo" Commedia, Inferno, IV, 144, meaning "Averrois, who wrote the great comment") and the patronage of Alfonso X of Castile. Of the twelve wise men Dante meets in Canto X of the Paradiso, Thomas Aquinas and, even more so, Siger of Brabant were strongly influenced by Arabic commentators on Aristotle.[62] Medieval Christian mysticism also shared the Neoplatonic influence of Sufis such as Ibn Arabi. Philosopher Frederick Copleston argued in 1950 that Dante's respectful treatment of Averroes, Avicenna, and Siger of Brabant indicates his acknowledgement of a "considerable debt" to Islamic philosophy.[62]

In 1919, Miguel Asín Palacios, a Spanish scholar and a Catholic priest, published La Escatología musulmana en la Divina Comedia (Islamic Eschatology in the Divine Comedy), an account of parallels between early Islamic philosophy and the Divine Comedy. Palacios argued that Dante derived many features of and episodes about the hereafter from the spiritual writings of Ibn Arabi and from the Isra and Mi'raj, or night journey of Muhammad to heaven. The latter is described in the ahadith and the Kitab al Miraj (translated into Latin in 1264 or shortly before[63] as Liber scalae Machometi, "The Book of Muhammad's Ladder"), and has significant similarities to the Paradiso, such as a sevenfold division of Paradise, although this is not unique to the Kitab al Miraj or Islamic cosmology.[64]

Many scholars have not been satisfied that Dante was influenced by the Kitab al Miraj. The 20th-century Orientalist Francesco Gabrieli expressed skepticism regarding the claimed similarities, and the lack of evidence of a vehicle through which it could have been transmitted to Dante.[65] The Italian philologist Maria Corti pointed out that, during his stay at the court of Alfonso X, Dante's mentor Brunetto Latini met Bonaventura de Siena, a Tuscan who had translated the Kitab al Miraj from Arabic into Latin. Corti speculates that Brunetto may have provided a copy of that work to Dante.[66] René Guénon, a Sufi convert and scholar of Ibn Arabi, confirms in The Esoterism of Dante the theory of the Islamic influence (direct or indirect) on Dante.[67] Palacios' theory that Dante was influenced by Ibn Arabi was satirised by the Turkish academic Orhan Pamuk in his novel The Black Book.[68]

In addition to that, it has been claimed that Risālat al-Ghufrān ("The Epistle of Forgiveness"), a satirical work mixing Arabic poetry and prose written by Abu al-ʿAlaʾ al-Maʿarri around 1033 CE, had an influence on, or even inspired, Dante's Divine Comedy.[69][70]

Criticism and textual history

Critical reception of the Divine Comedy has varied considerably prior to its universal renown today. Although recognised as a masterpiece in the centuries immediately following its publication,[71] the work largely fell into obscurity during the Enlightenment, with some notable exceptions: Vittorio Alfieri; Antoine de Rivarol, who translated the Inferno into French; and Giambattista Vico, who in the Scienza nuova and in the Giudizio su Dante inaugurated what would later become the romantic reappraisal of Dante, juxtaposing him to Homer.[72]

The Comedy was "rediscovered" in the English-speaking world by William Blake – who illustrated several passages of the epic – and the Romantic writers of the 19th century. Later authors such as T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, Samuel Beckett, C. S. Lewis and James Joyce have drawn on it for inspiration. The poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow was its first American translator,[73] and modern poets, including Seamus Heaney,[74] Robert Pinsky, John Ciardi, W. S. Merwin, and Stanley Lombardo, have also produced translations of all or parts of the book. In Russia, beyond Alexander Pushkin's translation of a few tercets,[75] Osip Mandelstam's late poetry has been said to bear the mark of a "tormented meditation" on the Comedy.[76] In 1934, Mandelstam gave a modern reading of the poem in his labyrinthine "Conversation on Dante".[77] Erich Auerbach said Dante was the first writer to depict human beings as the products of a specific time, place and circumstance, as opposed to mythic archetypes or a collection of vices and virtues, concluding that this, along with the fully imagined world of the Divine Comedy, suggests that the Divine Comedy inaugurated literary realism and self-portraiture in modern fiction.[78] In T. S. Eliot's estimation, "Dante and Shakespeare divide the world between them. There is no third."[79] For Jorge Luis Borges the Divine Comedy was "the best book literature has achieved".[80]

The Comedy is considered one originator of the encyclopedic novel across multiple formulations of the concept.[81] Mendelson's coinage of the term contrasted Dante's initial ostracism with his later importance to Italian national identity, comparing this to the culture-building function of later encyclopedic authors like Shakespeare, Cervantes, or Melville.[82]

English translations

The Divine Comedy has been translated into English more times than any other language, and new English translations of the Divine Comedy continue to be published regularly. Notable English translations of the complete poem include the following.[83]

A number of other translators, such as Robert Pinsky, have translated the Inferno only.

In popular culture

The Divine Comedy has been a source of inspiration for countless artists for almost seven centuries. There are many references to Dante's work in literature. In music, Franz Liszt was one of many composers to write works based on the Divine Comedy. In contemporary music, Hozier's 2023 album Unreal Unearth also draws inspiration from Dante's epic.[86] In sculpture, the work of Auguste Rodin includes themes from Dante. Sculptor Timothy Schmalz created a series of 100 sculptures, one for each canto, on the 700th anniversary of the date of Dante's death,[87] and many visual artists have illustrated Dante's work, as shown by the examples above. There have also been many references to the Divine Comedy in cinema, television, comics and video games.

See also

Allegory in the Middle Ages
Dream vision
List of cultural references in Divine Comedy
Seven Heavens
Theological fiction
Risalat al-Ghufran

Citations

^ For example, Encyclopedia Americana, 2006, Vol. 30. p. 605: "the greatest single work of Italian literature"; John Julius Norwich, The Italians: History, Art, and the Genius of a People, Abrams, 1983, p. 27: "his tremendous poem, still after six and a half centuries the supreme work of Italian literature, remains – after the legacy of ancient Rome – the grandest single element in the Italian heritage"; and Robert Reinhold Ergang, The Renaissance, Van Nostrand, 1967, p. 103: "Many literary historians regard the Divine Comedy as the greatest work of Italian literature. In world literature it is ranked as an epic poem of the highest order."

^ See Lepschy, Laura; Lepschy, Giulio (1977). The Italian Language Today. Or any other history of Italian language.

^ a b Vallone, Aldo. "Commedia" (trans. Robin Treasure). In: Lansing (ed.), The Dante Encyclopedia, pp. 181–184.

^ Emmerson, Richard K., and Ronald B. Herzman. "Revelation". In: Lansing (ed.), The Dante Encyclopedia, pp. 742–744.

^ "Divina Commedia". Enciclopedia Italiana (in Italian). Archived from the original on 18 February 2021. Retrieved 19 February 2021.

^ Ronnie H. Terpening, Lodovico Dolce, Renaissance Man of Letters (Toronto, Buffalo, London: University of Toronto Press, 1997), p. 166.

^ Dante The Inferno A Verse Translation, by Professor Robert and Jean Hollander, p. 43.

^ Epist. XIII, 43–48.

^ Wilkins, E. H., The Prologue to the Divine Comedy Annual Report of the Dante Society, pp. 1–7.

^ Kaske, Robert Earl, et al. Medieval Christian Literary Imagery: A Guide to Interpretation. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1988. p. 164.

^ Ferrante, Joan M. "Beatrice". In: Lansing (ed.), The Dante Encyclopedia, pp. 87–94.

^ Shaw 2014, pp. xx, 100–101, 108.

^ Picone, Michelangelo. "Bernard, St." (trans. Robin Treasure). In: Lansing (ed.), The Dante Encyclopedia, pp. 99–100.

^ Eiss 2017, p. 8.

^ Trone 2000, pp. 362–364.

^ "Inferno, la Divina Commedia annotata e commentata da Tommaso Di Salvo, Zanichelli, Bologna, 1985". Abebooks.it. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2010.

^ Lectura Dantis, Società dantesca italiana.

^ Online sources include [1] Archived 11 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine, [2] Archived 23 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, [3] [4] Archived 23 February 2004 at the Wayback Machine, "Le caratteristiche dell'opera". Archived from the original on 2 December 2009. Retrieved 1 December 2009.,    "Selva Oscura". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 20 February 2010.

^ Inferno, Canto XX, lines 13–15 and 38–39, Mandelbaum translation.

^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Purgatory, notes on p. 75.

^ Carlyle-Okey-Wicksteed, Divine Comedy, "Notes to Dante's Inferno".

^ Inferno, Canto 34, lines 121–126.

^ Barolini, Teodolinda. "Hell." In: Lansing (ed.), The Dante Encyclopedia, pp. 472–477.

^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Purgatory, Introduction, pp. 65–67 (Penguin, 1955).

^ Robin Kirkpatrick, Purgatorio, Introduction, p. xiv (Penguin, 2007).

^ Carlyle-Oakey-Wickstead, Divine Comedy, "Notes on Dante's Purgatory.

^ Kelly, Henry Ansgar (18 September 2018). "Epistle to Cangrande Updated". Dante Society. Dante Society of America. Retrieved 10 June 2024.

^ "The Letter to Can Grande," in Literary Criticism of Dante Alighieri, translated and edited by Robert S. Haller (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1973), p. 99.

^ Botterill, Steven (1990). "Life after Beatrice: Bernard of Clairvaux in Paradiso XXXI". Texas Studies in Literature and Language. 32 (1): 123.

^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Paradise, notes on Canto XXXIII.

^ Paradiso, Canto XXXIII, lines 142–145, C. H. Sisson translation.

^ "Elenco Codici". Dante Online. Archived from the original on 3 June 2009. Retrieved 5 August 2009.

^ Michele Zanobini, "Per Un Dante Latino": The Latin Translations of the Divine Comedy in Nineteenth-Century Italy Archived 20 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine, PhD dissertation. (Johns Hopkins University, 2016), pp. 16–17, 21–22.

^ Christopher Kleinhenz, Medieval Italy: An Encyclopedia, Volume 1, Routledge, 2004, ISBN 0-415-93930-5, p. 360.

^ "Epistle to Can Grande". faculty.georgetown.edu. Archived from the original on 29 January 2015. Retrieved 20 October 2014.

^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Hell, Introduction, p. 16 (Penguin, 1955).

^ "World History Encyclopedia". Archived from the original on 21 April 2021. Retrieved 20 April 2021.

^ Boccaccio also quotes the initial triplet:"Ultima regna canam fluvido contermina mundo, / spiritibus quae lata patent, quae premia solvunt / pro meritis cuicumque suis". For translation and more, see Guyda Armstrong, Review of Giovanni Boccaccio. Life of Dante. J. G. Nichols, trans. London: Hesperus Press, 2002.

^ Peri, Hiram (1955). "The Original Plan of the Divine Comedy". Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes. 18 (3/4): 189–210. doi:10.2307/750179. JSTOR 750179. S2CID 244492114.

^ Michael Caesar, Dante: The Critical Heritage, Routledge, 1995, pp. 288, 383, 412, 631.

^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Purgatory, notes on p. 286.

^ Purgatorio, Canto XXVII, lines 1–6, Mandelbaum translation.

^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Inferno, notes on p. 284.

^ Paradiso, Canto II, lines 94–105, Mandelbaum translation.

^ Peterson, Mark A. (2002). "Galileo's discovery of scaling laws" (PDF). American Journal of Physics. 70 (6). American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT): 575–580. arXiv:physics/0110031. Bibcode:2002AmJPh..70..575P. doi:10.1119/1.1475329. ISSN 0002-9505. S2CID 16106719. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 April 2021. Retrieved 6 February 2018.

^ Moore, Edward (1968) [1896]. Studies in Dante, First Series: Scripture and Classical Authors in Dante. New York: Greenwood Press. p. 4.

^ Jacoff, Rachel; Schnapp, Jeffrey T. (1991). The Poetry of Allusion: Virgil and Ovid in Dante's 'Commedia'. Stanford University Press. pp. 1–3. ISBN 978-0-8047-1860-8. Archived from the original on 29 November 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2023.

^ Van Peteghem, Julie (19 August 2015). "Digital Readers of Allusive Texts: Ovidian Intertextuality in the 'Commedia' and the Digital Concordance on 'Intertextual Dante'". Humanist Studies & the Digital Age. 4 (1): 39–59. doi:10.5399/uo/hsda.4.1.3584. ISSN 2158-3846. Archived from the original on 21 March 2024. Retrieved 21 March 2024.

^ Commentary to Paradiso, IV.90 by Robert and Jean Hollander, The Inferno: A Verse Translation (New York: Anchor Books, 2002), as found on Dante Lab, http://dantelab.dartmouth.edu Archived 14 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine

^ Lafferty, Roger. "The Philosophy of Dante Archived 29 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine", pg. 4

^ Inferno, Canto XI, lines 70–115, Mandelbaum translation.

^ Cornell University, Visions of Dante: Glossary Archived 29 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Moore, Edward. Studies in Dante, First Series: Scripture and Classical Authors in Dante Archived 29 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 [1896], pp. 4, 8, 47–48.

^ Toynbee, Paget. Dictionary of Dante A Dictionary of the works of Dante Archived 25 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine, p. 532.

^ Alighieri, Dante (1904). Philip Henry Wicksteed, Herman Oelsner (ed.). The Paradiso of Dante Alighieri (fifth ed.). J.M. Dent and Company. p. 126.

^ Commentary to Paradiso, I.1–12 and I.96–112 by John S. Carroll, Paradiso: A Verse Translation (New York: Anchor Books, 2007), as found on Dante Lab, http://dantelab.dartmouth.edu Archived 14 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Fordham College Monthly. Vol. XL. Fordham University. December 1921. p. 76. Archived from the original on 4 August 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2015.

^ Commentary to Paradiso, XXXII.31–32 by Robert and Jean Hollander, Paradiso: A Verse Translation (New York: Anchor Books, 2007), as found on Dante Lab, http://dantelab.dartmouth.edu Archived 14 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Maurer, Christian (1965) [1964]. Schneemelcher, Wilhelm (ed.). New Testament Apocrypha, Volume Two: Writings Relating to the Apostles; Apocalypses and Related Subjects. Translated by Wilson, Robert McLachlan. Philadelphia: Westminster Press. pp. 663–668.

^ Silverstein, Theodore (1935). Visio Sancti Pauli: The History of the Apocalypse in Latin, Together with Nine Texts. London: Christophers. pp. 3–5, 91.

^ Maier, Harry O. (2007). "Review of Die Visio Pauli: Wege und Wandlungen einer orientalischen Apokryphe im lateinischen Mittelalter, unter Einschluß der alttschechischen und deutschsprachigen Textzeugen". Speculum (in German). 82 (4): 1000–1002. doi:10.1017/S0038713400011647. JSTOR 20466112.

^ a b Copleston, Frederick (1950). A History of Philosophy. Vol. 2. London: Continuum. p. 200.

^ I. Heullant-Donat and M.-A. Polo de Beaulieu, "Histoire d'une traduction," in Le Livre de l'échelle de Mahomet, Latin edition and French translation by Gisèle Besson and Michèle Brossard-Dandré, Collection Lettres Gothiques, Le Livre de Poche, 1991, p. 22 with note 37.

^ Uždavinys, Algis (2011). Ascent to Heaven in Islamic and Jewish Mysticism. Matheson Trust. pp. 23, 92–93, 117. ISBN 978-1-908092-02-1.

^ Gabrieli, Francesco (1954). "New Light on Dante and Islam". Diogenes. 2 (6): 61–73. doi:10.1177/039219215400200604. S2CID 143999655.

^ "Errore". Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 7 September 2007.

^ Guenon, René (1925). The Esoterism of Dante.

^ Almond, Ian (2002). "The Honesty of the Perplexed: Derrida and Ibn 'Arabi on "Bewilderment"". Journal of the American Academy of Religion. 70 (3): 515–537. doi:10.1093/jaar/70.3.515. JSTOR 1466522.

^ Glassé, Cyril (2008). The New Encyclopedia of Islam, 3rd Volume (3rd ed.). Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 278. ISBN 978-0-7425-6296-7.

^ Watt, Montgomery W.; Cachia, Pierre (2017). A History of Islamic Spain. pp. 125–126. doi:10.4324/9781315083490. ISBN 978-1-315-08349-0. Archived from the original on 7 August 2022. Retrieved 7 August 2022.

^ Chaucer wrote in the Monk's Tale, "Redeth the grete poete of Ytaille /
That highte Dant, for he kan al devyse /
Fro point to point; nat o word wol he faille".

^ Auerbach, Erich (1961). Dante, Poet of the Secular World. Translated by Manheim, Ralph. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-03205-1. OCLC 2016697. Archived from the original on 6 September 2023. Retrieved 19 March 2023. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)

^ Irmscher, Christoph. Longfellow Redux. University of Illinois, 2008: 11. ISBN 978-0-252-03063-5.

^ Seamus Heaney, "Envies and Identifications: Dante and the Modern Poet." The Poet's Dante: Twentieth-Century Responses. Ed. Peter S. Hawkins and Rachel Jacoff. New York: Farrar, 2001. pp. 239–258.

^ Isenberg, Charles. "Dante in Russia." In: Lansing (ed.), The Dante Encyclopedia, pp. 276–278.

^ Glazova, Marina (November 1984). "Mandel'štam and Dante: The Divine Comedy in Mandel'štam's Poetry of the 1930s Archived 29 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine". Studies in Soviet Thought. 28 (4).

^ Fenton, James (16 July 2005). "Hell set to music". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 29 November 2022. Retrieved 21 March 2024.

^ Auerbach, Erich (16 January 2007). Dante: Poet of the Secular World. New York Review of Books. pp. viii–ix. ISBN 978-1-59017-219-3.

^ T. S. Eliot (1950) "Dante." Selected Essays, pp. 199–237. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company.

^ Jorge Luis Borges, "Selected Non-Fictions". Ed. Eliot Weinberger. Trans. Esther Allen et al. New York: Viking, 1999. p. 303.

^ Clark, Hillary A. "Encyclopedic Discourse". Sub-stance 21.1 (1992): 95–110.

^ Mendelson, Edward (December 1976). "Encyclopedic Narrative: From Dante to Pynchon". MLN. 91 (6): 1267–1275. doi:10.2307/2907136. JSTOR 2907136.

^ A comprehensive listing and criticism, covering the period 1782–1966, of English translations of at least one of the three cantiche is given by Gilbert F. Cunningham, The Divine Comedy in English: A Critical Bibliography, 2 vols. (New York: Barnes & Noble, 1965–1967), esp. vol. 2, pp. 5–9.

^ Dante Alighieri. Bergin, Thomas G. trans. Divine Comedy. Grossman Publishers; 1st edition (1969) .

^ "Dante et Virgile – William Bouguereau". Musée d'Orsay. Archived from the original on 1 December 2022. Retrieved 1 December 2022.

^ "Inside Hozier's 'Unreal Unearth': How the Singer Flipped Dante's 'Inferno' & the Irish Language into His Latest Album". grammy.com. Retrieved 22 October 2024.

^ Farrell, Jane (8 September 2021). "The Divine Comedy in sculpture: Timothy Schmalz". The Florentine. Archived from the original on 4 June 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2022.

Bibliography

Eiss, Harry (2017). Seeking God in the Works of T. S. Eliot and Michelangelo. New Castle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars. ISBN 978-1-4438-4390-4.
Shaw, Prue (2014). Reading Dante: From Here to Eternity. New York: Liveright Publishing. ISBN 978-1-63149-006-4.
Trone, George Andrew (2000). "Exile". In Lansing, Richard (ed.). The Dante Encyclopedia. London and New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-87611-7.

Further reading

Ziolkowski, Jan M. (2015). Dante and Islam. Fordham University Press, New York. ISBN 0823263878.

External links

Divine Comedy at Standard Ebooks
Princeton Dante Project: website that offers the complete text of the Divine Comedy (and Dante's other works) in Italian and English along with audio accompaniment in both languages. Includes historical and interpretive annotation.
(in Italian) Full text of the Commedia Archived 27 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Dante Dartmouth Project: full text of more than 70 Italian, Latin, and English commentaries on the Commedia, ranging in date from 1322 (Iacopo Alighieri) to the 2000s (Robert Hollander)
A Dictionary of the Proper Names and Notable Matters in the Works of Dante by Paget Toynbee (Oxford: Clarendon, 1898)
Columbia University's Digital Dante: features the full text in Italian alongside English translations from Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and Allen Mandelbaum. Includes English commentary from Teodolinda Barolini as well as multimedia resources relating to the Divine Comedy.
 Divine Comedy public domain audiobook at LibriVox (in English and Italian)
Going Through Hell: The Divine Dante: exhibition at the National Gallery of Art, 9 April – 16 July 2023

vte

Acheron
Bertran de Born
Bonturo Dati
Brunetto Latini
Caiaphas
Cavalcante de' Cavalcanti
Capaneus
Cerberus
Charon
Chiron
Ciacco
Ciampolo
Cocytus
Dis
Farinata degli Uberti
Filippo Argenti
Francesca da Rimini
Geryon
Gianni Schicchi de' Cavalcanti
Great refusal
Gualdrada Berti
Guido Guerra
Guido I da Montefeltro
Iacopo Rusticucci
Malebolge
Minos
Nessus
Paolo Malatesta
Phlegethon
Phlegyas
Pietro della Vigna
Plutus
Pope Boniface VIII
Pope Nicholas III
Ruggieri degli Ubaldini
Satan
Styx
Ugolino della Gherardesca
Ulysses
Vanni Fucci
Virgil

First
Second
Third
Fourth
Fifth
Sixth
Seventh
Eighth
Ninth

Alichino
Barbariccia
Cagnazzo
Calcabrina
Ciriatto
Draghignazzo
Farfarello
Malacoda
Rubicante
Scarmiglione

Alagia Fieschi
Arnaut Daniel
Beatrice Portinari
Beatrice d'Este
Belacqua
Bonagiunta Orbicciani
Bonconte I da Montefeltro
Casella
Cato the Younger
Conrad Malaspina
Eunoe
Forese Donati
Gaia da Camino
Garden of Eden
Gherardo III da Camino
Giovanna da Montefeltro
Guido Guinizelli
Hugh Capet
Jacopo del Cassero
Giovanna Visconti
Lethe
Manfred
Marco Lombardo
Matelda
Nella Donati
Nino Visconti
Oderisi da Gubbio
Omberto Aldobrandeschi
Pia de' Tolomei
Pope Adrian V
Sapia Salvani
Sordello
Statius

Adam
Bernard of Clairvaux
Bonaventure
Cacciaguida
Charles Martel of Anjou
Constance I of Sicily
Constance II of Sicily
Cunizza da Romano
David
Empyrean
Folquet de Marselha
Gabriel
God
Hierarchy of angels
Imperial Eagle
James the Great
John the Apostle
Justinian I
Mary, mother of Jesus
Peter Damian
Peter Lombard
Piccarda
Ripheus
Solomon
Saint Peter
Thomas Aquinas
Trajan

Contrapasso
Terza rima
Great refusal

"Pape Satàn, pape Satàn aleppe"
"Raphèl mai amècche zabì almi"

Palacio Barolo (Palanti, 1923)
Danteum (Terragni, 1938)

L'Inferno (1911)
Dante's Inferno (1924)
Dante's Inferno (1935)
The Dante Quartet (1987)
A TV Dante (1989)
The Deep and Dreamless Sleep (2006)
Dante's Inferno (2007)
Dante's Inferno: An Animated Epic (2010)
La commedia di Amos Poe (2010)
Dante's Hell Animated (2013)
Botticelli Inferno (2016 documentary)

Demon Lord Dante (1971)
Jimbo's Inferno (2006)
Dante's Inferno (2023)
Gert's Inferno (2023)

Divine Comedy Illustrated by Botticelli (1485)
Jean Giraud (Paradiso, 1999)

The Story of Rimini (1816)
La Comédie humaine (1830–1850)
Earth Inferno (1905)
The Cantos (1917–1962)
As I Was Going Down Sackville Street (1937)
The System of Dante's Hell (1965)
Inferno (1976)
The Dante Club (2003)
Inferno (2013)

Après une Lecture de Dante: Fantasia quasi Sonata (Liszt, 1849)
Dante Symphony (Liszt, 1857)
Francesca da Rimini (Tchaikovsky, 1876)
Francesca da Rimini (Rachmaninoff, 1904)
Francesca da Rimini (Zandonai, 1914)
Gianni Schicchi (Puccini, 1918)
The Divine Comedy (Smith, 1996)
Inferno (Ronchetti, 2020)

Inferno (1973 album)
"Dante's Inferno" (1995 song)
Dante XXI (2006 album)
A Place Where the Sun Is Silent (2011 album)

The Barque of Dante (Delacroix, 1822)
The Wood of the Self-Murderers: The Harpies and the Suicides (Blake, 1827)
Francesca da Rimini and Paolo Malatesta Appraised by Dante and Virgil (Scheffer, 1835)
Dante in Hell (Flandrin, 1835)
The Barque of Dante (Manet, 1850s)
Pia de' Tolomei (Rossetti, 1868)
Paolo and Francesca da Rimini (Rossetti, 1885)
La barca de Aqueronte (Hidalgo, 1887)
La Laguna Estigia (Hidalgo, 1887)

The Gates of Hell (Rodin, 1917)
The Kiss (1882)
The Thinker (1904)

King of Demons (1996)
Devil May Cry series (2001)
Bayonetta series (2009)
Dante's Inferno (2010)
The Lost (cancelled)

Cultural references
English translations
In popular culture

Category

vte

De vulgari eloquentia
De Monarchia
Eclogues
Epistle to Cangrande (disputed)

La Vita Nuova
Le Rime
Convivio

Inferno
Purgatorio
Paradiso
Cultural references

Contrapasso
Dante Encyclopedia
Enciclopedia Dantesca

Alighiero di Bellincione (father)
Jacopo Alighieri (son)
Guido Cavalcanti
Brunetto Latini
Beatrice Portinari
Ferreto de' Ferreti

Cando lucis aeternae

Dante crater
Dante asteroid
83 Beatrix
Dante Alighieri Academy
Scuola Italiana Dante Alighieri
Dante Park, New York
Dante Park, Montreal
Monument to Dante
The Barque of Dante (1822 painting)
Dante in Hell (1835 painting)
Francesca da Rimini and Paolo Malatesta Appraised by Dante and Virgil (1835 painting)
Dante and Virgil (1850 painting)
The Barque of Dante (1858 painting)
Dante's Dream (1871 painting)
Dante and Beatrice (1883 painting)
Beatrice (1919 film)
Dante Alighieri (1921 sculpture)
Dante Symphony
Italian battleship Dante Alighieri
Devil May Cry
Dante's Inferno (video game)

Tomb of Dante
Dante Society of America

vte

Paolo and Francesca da Rimini
The Kiss
Francesca da Rimini and Paolo Malatesta Appraised by Dante and Virgil

Drums of Love

Francesca da Rimini (Rachmaninoff)
Françoise de Rimini (Thomas)
Francesca da Rimini (Zandonai)

Francesca da Rimini (Tchaikovsky)

Divine Comedy
Inferno

Inferno

Francesca da Rimini (D'Annunzio)
Francesca da Rimini (play) (George Henry Boker)

vte

Lust
Gluttony
Envy
Greed
Sloth
Pride
Wrath

Evagrius Ponticus
John Cassian
Pope Gregory I
Dante Alighieri
Peter Binsfeld

Divine Comedy
Inferno
Purgatorio
The Keys to the Kingdom (book series)
The Seven Deadly Sins (1585 play)
The Seven Deadly Sins and the Four Last Things (painting)
The Seven Deadly Sins (1933 ballet)
The Seven Deadly Sins (1952 film)
The Seven Deadly Sins (1962 film)
The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence (1975)
Seven (1995 film)
Fullmetal Alchemist (manga series)
Fullmetal Alchemist (2003 anime)
Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood (2009 anime)
The Seven Deadly Sins (manga series)
The Seven Deadly Sins of Modern Times (painting)
Re:Zero − Starting Life in Another World (light novel series)
Re:Zero − Starting Life in Another World (2016 anime)
Four Last Things (video game)
Graveyard Keeper (2018 video game)
Shazam! (comic book)
Seven Deadly Enemies of Man
Shazam! (2019 film)
Helluva Boss (2020 animated series)
Limbus Company (2023 video game)
Hazbin Hotel (2024 animated series)

Inferno
Purgatorio

Seven Deadly Enemies of Man
Shazam! (2019 film)

Seven Heavenly Virtues
Seven Social Sins
Sin
Christian views on sin
Christian views on the Old Covenant
Hamartiology
Peter Binsfeld

Christian views on sin

Catholicism portal

vte

Prudence (Prudentia)
Justice (Iustitia)
Fortitude (Fortitudo)
Temperance (Temperantia)

Sources: Plato
Republic, Book IV
Cicero
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Thomas Aquinas

Republic, Book IV

Faith (Fides)
Hope (Spes)
Love (Caritas)

Sources: Paul the Apostle
1 Corinthians 13

1 Corinthians 13

Chastity (Castitas)
Temperance (Temperantia)
Charity (Caritas)
Diligence (Diligentia)
Kindness (Humanitas)
Patience (Patientia)
Humility (Humilitas)

Lust (Luxuria)
Gluttony (Gula)
Greed (Avaritia)
Sloth (Acedia)
Wrath (Ira)
Envy (Invidia)
Pride (Superbia)

Source: Prudentius, Psychomachia

People: Evagrius Ponticus
John Cassian
Pope Gregory I
Dante Alighieri
Peter Binsfeld

Ten Commandments
Great Commandment
Eschatology
Sin
Original sin
Old Covenant
Hamartiology

Original sin

Christian philosophy

VIAF23456

23456

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataAustraliaCzech RepublicSpainNorwayCroatiaSwedenVaticanIsraelCatalonia

IdRefMusicBrainz work2İslâm Ansiklopedisi

2

A fossil fuel[a] is a flammable carbon compound- or hydrocarbon-containing material[2] formed naturally in the Earth's crust from the buried remains of prehistoric organisms (animals, plants or microplanktons), a process that occurs within geological formations. Reservoirs of such compound mixtures, such as coal, petroleum and natural gas, can be extracted and burnt as fuel for human consumption to provide energy for direct use (such as for cooking, heating or lighting), to power heat engines (such as steam or internal combustion engines) that can propel vehicles, or to generate electricity via steam turbine generators.[3] Some fossil fuels are further refined into derivatives such as kerosene, gasoline and diesel, or converted into petrochemicals such as polyolefins (plastics), aromatics and synthetic resins.

The origin of fossil fuels is the anaerobic decomposition of buried dead organisms. The conversion from these organic materials to high-carbon fossil fuels is typically the result of a geological process of millions of years.[4] Due to the length of time it takes for them to form, fossil fuels are considered non-renewable resources.

In 2023, 77% of primary energy consumption in the world[5] and over 60% of its electricity supply were from fossil fuels.[6] The large-scale burning of fossil fuels causes serious environmental damage. Over 70% of the greenhouse gas emissions due to human activity in 2022 was carbon dioxide (CO2) released from burning fossil fuels.[7] Natural carbon cycle processes on Earth, mostly absorption by the ocean, can remove only a small part of this, and terrestrial vegetation loss due to deforestation, land degradation and desertification further compounds this deficiency. Therefore, there is a net increase of many billion tonnes of atmospheric CO2 per year.[8] Although methane leaks are significant,[9]: 52  the burning of fossil fuels is the main source of greenhouse gas emissions causing global warming and ocean acidification. Additionally, most air pollution deaths are due to fossil fuel particulates and noxious gases, and it is estimated that this costs over 3% of the global gross domestic product[10] and that fossil fuel phase-out will save millions of lives each year.[11][12]

Recognition of the climate crisis, pollution and other negative impacts caused by fossil fuels has led to a widespread policy transition and activist movement focused on ending their use in favor of renewable and sustainable energy.[13] Because the fossil-fuel industry is so heavily integrated in the global economy and heavily subsidized,[14] this transition is expected to have significant economic impacts.[15] Many stakeholders argue that this change needs to be a just transition[16] and create policy that addresses the societal burdens created by the stranded assets of the fossil fuel industry.[17][18] International policy, in the form of United Nations' sustainable development goals for affordable and clean energy and climate action, as well as the Paris Climate Agreement, is designed to facilitate this transition at a global level. In 2021, the International Energy Agency concluded that no new fossil fuel extraction projects could be opened if the global economy and society wants to avoid the worst impacts of climate change and meet international goals for climate change mitigation.[19]

Origin

The theory that fossil fuels formed from the fossilized remains of dead plants by exposure to heat and pressure in Earth's crust over millions of years was first introduced by Andreas Libavius "in his 1597 Alchemia [Alchymia]" and later by Mikhail Lomonosov "as early as 1757 and certainly by 1763".[21] The first recorded use of the term "fossil fuel" occurs in the work of the German chemist Caspar Neumann, in English translation in 1759.[22] The Oxford English Dictionary notes that, in the phrase "fossil fuel," the adjective "fossil" means "[o]btained by digging; found buried in the earth", which dates to at least 1652,[23] before the English noun "fossil" came to refer primarily to long-dead organisms in the early 18th century.[24]

Aquatic phytoplankton and zooplankton that died and sedimented in large quantities under anoxic conditions millions of years ago began forming petroleum and natural gas as a result of anaerobic decomposition. Over geological time this organic matter, mixed with mud, became buried under further heavy layers of inorganic sediment. The resulting high temperature and pressure caused the organic matter to chemically alter, first into a waxy material known as kerogen, which is found in oil shales, and then with more heat into liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons in a process known as catagenesis. Despite these heat-driven transformations, the energy released in combustion is still photosynthetic in origin.[25]

Terrestrial plants tended to form coal and methane. Many of the coal fields date to the Carboniferous period of Earth's history. Terrestrial plants also form type III kerogen, a source of natural gas. Although fossil fuels are continually formed by natural processes, they are classified as non-renewable resources because they take millions of years to form and known viable reserves are being depleted much faster than new ones are generated.[26][27]

Importance

Fossil fuels have been important to human development because they can be readily burned in the open atmosphere to produce heat. The use of peat as a domestic fuel predates recorded history. Coal was burned in some early furnaces for the smelting of metal ore, while semi-solid hydrocarbons from oil seeps were also burned in ancient times,[30] they were mostly used for waterproofing and embalming.[31]

Commercial exploitation of petroleum began in the 19th century.[32]

Natural gas, once flared-off as an unneeded byproduct of petroleum production, is now considered a very valuable resource.[33] Natural gas deposits are also the main source of helium.

Heavy crude oil, which is much more viscous than conventional crude oil, and oil sands, where bitumen is found mixed with sand and clay, began to become more important as sources of fossil fuel in the early 2000s.[34] Oil shale and similar materials are sedimentary rocks containing kerogen, a complex mixture of high-molecular weight organic compounds, which yield synthetic crude oil when heated (pyrolyzed). With additional processing, they can be employed instead of other established fossil fuels. During the 2010s and 2020s there was disinvestment from exploitation of such resources due to their high carbon cost relative to more easily-processed reserves.[35]

Prior to the latter half of the 18th century, windmills and watermills provided the energy needed for work such as milling flour, sawing wood or pumping water, while burning wood or peat provided domestic heat. The wide-scale use of fossil fuels, coal at first and petroleum later, in steam engines enabled the Industrial Revolution. At the same time, gas lights using natural gas or coal gas were coming into wide use. The invention of the internal combustion engine and its use in automobiles and trucks greatly increased the demand for gasoline and diesel oil, both made from fossil fuels. Other forms of transportation, railways and aircraft, also require fossil fuels. The other major use for fossil fuels is in generating electricity and as feedstock for the petrochemical industry. Tar, a leftover of petroleum extraction, is used in the construction of roads.

The energy for the Green Revolution was provided by fossil fuels in the form of fertilizers (natural gas), pesticides (oil), and hydrocarbon-fueled irrigation.[36][37] The development of synthetic nitrogen fertilizer has significantly supported global population growth; it has been estimated that almost half of the Earth's population are currently fed as a result of synthetic nitrogen fertilizer use.[38] According to head of a fertilizers commodity price agency, "50% of the world's food relies on fertilisers."[39]

Environmental effects

The burning of fossil fuels has a number of negative externalities – harmful environmental impacts where the effects extend beyond the people using the fuel. These effects vary between different fuels. All fossil fuels release CO2 when they burn, thus accelerating climate change. Burning coal, and to a lesser extent oil and its derivatives, contributes to atmospheric particulate matter, smog and acid rain.[40][41][42]
Air pollution from fossil fuels in 2018 has been estimated to cost US$2.9 trillion, or 3.3% of the global gross domestic product (GDP).[10]

Climate change is largely driven by the release of greenhouse gases like CO2, and the burning of fossil fuels is the main source of these emissions. In most parts of the world climate change is negatively impacting ecosystems.[45] This includes contributing to the extinction of species and reducing people's ability to produce food, thus adding to the problem of world hunger. Continued rises in global temperatures will lead to further adverse effects on both ecosystems and people; the World Health Organization has said that climate change is the greatest threat to human health in the 21st century.[46][47]

Combustion of fossil fuels generates sulfuric and nitric acids, which fall to Earth as acid rain, impacting both natural areas and the built environment. Monuments and sculptures made from marble and limestone are particularly vulnerable, as the acids dissolve calcium carbonate.

Fossil fuels also contain radioactive materials, mainly uranium and thorium, which are released into the atmosphere. In 2000, about 12,000 tonnes of thorium and 5,000 tonnes of uranium were released worldwide from burning coal.[48] It is estimated that during 1982, US coal burning released 155 times as much radioactivity into the atmosphere as the Three Mile Island accident.[49]

Burning coal also generates large amounts of bottom ash and fly ash. These materials are used in a wide variety of applications (see Fly ash reuse), utilizing, for example,[clarification needed] about 40% of the United States production.[50]

In addition to the effects that result from burning, the harvesting, processing, and distribution of fossil fuels also have environmental effects. Coal mining methods, particularly mountaintop removal and strip mining, have negative environmental impacts, and offshore oil drilling poses a hazard to aquatic organisms. Fossil fuel wells can contribute to methane release via fugitive gas emissions. Oil refineries also have negative environmental impacts, including air and water pollution. Coal is sometimes transported by diesel-powered locomotives, while crude oil is typically transported by tanker ships, requiring the combustion of additional fossil fuels.

A variety of mitigating efforts have arisen to counter the negative effects of fossil fuels. This includes a movement to use alternative energy sources, such as renewable energy. Environmental regulation uses a variety of approaches to limit these emissions; for example, rules against releasing waste products like fly ash into the atmosphere.[42]

In December 2020, the United Nations released a report saying that despite the need to reduce greenhouse emissions, various governments are "doubling down" on fossil fuels, in some cases diverting over 50% of their COVID-19 recovery stimulus funding to fossil fuel production rather than to alternative energy. The UN secretary general António Guterres declared that "Humanity is waging war on nature. This is suicidal. Nature always strikes back – and it is already doing so with growing force and fury." He also claimed there is still cause for hope, anticipating the US plan to join other large emitters like China and the EU in adopting targets to reach net zero emissions by 2050.[52][53][54]

Inflation effects

Fossilflation is a term that describes the impact of fossil fuels on inflation.[55][56]

According to Vox in August 2022, "Economists have pointed to energy prices as the main reason for high inflation," noting that "energy prices indirectly affect virtually every part of the economy".[55] Sectors that raise prices significantly as a result of higher fossil fuel prices include transportation, food, and shipping.[55]

History

Mark Zandi of Moody's says that fossil fuel prices have driven every big episode of inflation since WWII.[55]

The economic impact of the Russian Invasion of Ukraine in 2022 was a major recent example of fossil fuels causing inflation.[56] Some economists, including Isabel Schnabel, believe that dependence on fossil fuels is the main driver of the 2021-2022 inflation spike.[55][56]

Efforts to combat fossilflation

Gernot Wagner argues that commodities are undesirable energy sources because they are susceptible to volatile price swings that technologies like renewable energy are not. He also argues that technologies improve and get relatively cheaper over time.[55][57] Coming out of the COVID-19 pandemic, some argued for the possibility of a base effect phenomenon due to cheaper than normal prices, such as for oil, at the onset of the pandemic, followed by above-average prices which exacerbated the perceived inflation.[58][59]

Inflation Reduction Act

While not expected to provide much short-term relief, the Inflation Reduction Act seeks to make the United States less dependent on fossil fuels and their ability to cause inflation in the economy.[55][60][57] Moody's estimates that by 2030, the bill could reduce the typical American household's spending on energy by more than $300 each year, in 2022 dollars.[55]

Illness and deaths

Environmental pollution from fossil fuels impacts humans because particulates and other air pollution from fossil fuel combustion may cause illness and death when inhaled. These health effects include premature death, acute respiratory illness, aggravated asthma, chronic bronchitis and decreased lung function. The poor, undernourished, very young and very old, and people with preexisting respiratory disease and other ill health are more at risk.[62] Global air pollution deaths due to fossil fuels have been estimated at over 8 million people (2018, nearly 1 in 5 deaths worldwide)[63] at 10.2 million (2019),[64] and 5.13 million excess deaths from ambient air pollution from fossil fuel use (2023).[65]

While all energy sources inherently have adverse effects, the data show that fossil fuels cause the highest levels of greenhouse gas emissions and are the most dangerous for human health. In contrast, modern renewable energy sources appear to be safer for human health and cleaner. The death rates from accidents and air pollution in the EU are as follows per terawatt-hour (TWh):

[66] As the data shows, coal, oil, natural gas, and biomass cause higher death rates and higher levels of greenhouse gas emissions than hydropower, nuclear energy, wind, and solar power. Scientists propose that 1.8 million lives have been saved by replacing fossil fuel sources with nuclear power.[67]

Phase-out

Just transition

Divestment

Fossil fuel divestment or fossil fuel divestment and investment in climate solutions is an attempt to reduce climate change by exerting social, political, and economic pressure for the institutional divestment of assets including stocks, bonds, and other financial instruments connected to companies involved in extracting fossil fuels.[73]

Fossil fuel divestment campaigns emerged on college and university campuses in the United States in 2011 with students urging their administrations to turn endowment investments in the fossil fuel industry into investments in clean energy and communities most impacted by climate change.[74] In 2012, Unity College in Maine became the first institution of higher learning to divest[75] its endowment from fossil fuels.

By 2015, fossil fuel divestment was reportedly the fastest growing divestment movement in history.[76] As of July 2023, more than 1593 institutions with assets totalling more than $40.5 trillion in assets worldwide had begun or committed some form of divestment of fossil fuels.[77]

Industrial sector

In 2019, Saudi Aramco was listed and it reached a US$2 trillion valuation on its second day of trading,[81] after the world's largest initial public offering.[82]

Subsidies

Fossil fuel subsidies are energy subsidies on fossil fuels. Under a narrow definition, fossil fuel subsidies totalled around $1.5 trillion in 2022.[83] Under more expansive definition, they totalled around $7 trillion.[83] They may be tax breaks on consumption, such as a lower sales tax on natural gas for residential heating; or subsidies on production, such as  tax breaks on exploration for oil. Or they may be free or cheap negative externalities; such as air pollution or climate change due to burning gasoline, diesel and jet fuel. Some fossil fuel subsidies are via electricity generation, such as subsidies for coal-fired power stations.

Eliminating fossil fuel subsidies would reduce the health risks of air pollution,[84] and would greatly reduce global carbon emissions thus helping to limit climate change.[85] As of 2021[update], policy researchers estimate that substantially more money is spent on fossil fuel subsidies than on environmentally harmful agricultural subsidies or environmentally harmful water subsidies.[86] The International Energy Agency says: "High fossil fuel prices hit the poor hardest, but subsidies are rarely well-targeted to protect vulnerable groups and tend to benefit better-off segments of the population."[87]

Lobbying activities

The fossil fuels lobby includes paid representatives of corporations involved in the fossil fuel industry (oil, gas, coal), as well as related industries like chemicals, plastics, aviation and other transportation.[92] Because of their wealth and the importance of energy, transport and chemical industries to local, national and international economies, these lobbies have the capacity and money to attempt to have outsized influence on governmental policy. In particular, the lobbies have been known to obstruct policy related to environmental protection, environmental health and climate action.[93]

Lobbies are active in most fossil-fuel intensive economies with democratic governance, with reporting on the lobbies most prominent in Canada, Australia, the United States and Europe; however, the lobbies are present in many parts of the world. Big Oil companies such as ExxonMobil, Shell, BP, TotalEnergies, Chevron Corporation, and ConocoPhillips are among the largest corporations associated with the fossil fuels lobby.[94] The American Petroleum Institute is a powerful industry lobbyist for Big Oil with significant influence in Washington, D.C.[95][96][97] In Australia, Australian Energy Producers, formerly known as the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (APPEA), has significant influence in Canberra and helps to maintain favorable policy settings for Oil and Gas.[98]

See also

Abiogenic petroleum origin – a proposal that petroleum is not a fossil fuel
Bioremediation
Carbon bubble
Eco-economic decoupling
Environmental impact of the energy industry
Fossil Fools Day
Fossil Fuel Beta
Hydraulic fracturing
Liquefied petroleum gas
Low-carbon power
Peak coal
Peak gas
Phase-out of fossil fuel vehicles
Shale gas

Notes

^ The term has been considered a misnomer because it does not actually originate from fossils, but from preserved organic matters.[1]

References

^ Fleckenstein, Joseph E. (2016). Three-phase electrical power. Boca Raton: CRC Press. p. 58. ISBN 978-1-4987-3778-4. OCLC 958799795.

^ "Fossil fuel". ScienceDaily. Retrieved 29 October 2021.

^ "Fossil fuels". Geological Survey Ireland. Retrieved 29 October 2021.

^ Paul Mann, Lisa Gahagan, and Mark B. Gordon, "Tectonic setting of the world's giant oil and gas fields", in Michel T. Halbouty (ed.) Giant Oil and Gas Fields of the Decade, 1990–1999, Tulsa, Okla.: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, p. 50, accessed 22 June 2009.

^ Ritchie, Hannah; Rosaldo, Pablo (2024). "Energy Mix". Our World in Data. Retrieved 1 May 2025.

^ Ritchie, Hannah; Rosaldo, Pablo (2024). "Electricity mix". Our World in Data. Retrieved 1 May 2025.

^ "EDGAR - The Emissions Database for Global Atmospheric Research". edgar.jrc.ec.europa.eu. Retrieved 5 January 2024.

^ "What Are Greenhouse Gases?". US Department of Energy. Retrieved 9 September 2007.

^ "Chapter 2: Emissions trends and drivers" (PDF). Ipcc_Ar6_Wgiii. 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 April 2022.

^ a b "Quantifying the Economic Costs of Air Pollution from Fossil Fuels" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 April 2020.

^ Zhang, Sharon. "Air Pollution Is Killing More People Than Smoking—and Fossil Fuels Are Largely to Blame". Pacific Standard. Retrieved 5 February 2020.

^ Lelieveld, J.; Klingmüller, K.; Pozzer, A.; Burnett, R. T.; Haines, A.; Ramanathan, V. (9 April 2019). "Effects of fossil fuel and total anthropogenic emission removal on public health and climate". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 116 (15): 7192–7197. Bibcode:2019PNAS..116.7192L. doi:10.1073/pnas.1819989116. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 6462052. PMID 30910976. the potential benefits of a phaseout .... can avoid an excess mortality rate of 3.61 (2.96–4.21) million per year

^ Dickie, Gloria (4 April 2022). "Factbox: Key takeaways from the IPCC report on climate change mitigation". Reuters. Retrieved 5 April 2022.

^ "Price Spike Fortifies Fossil Fuel Subsidies". Energy Intelligence. 14 April 2022. Retrieved 23 April 2022.

^ "Why are fossil fuels so hard to quit?". Brookings. 8 June 2020. Retrieved 5 April 2022.

^ "IPCC: We can tackle climate change if big oil gets out of the way". the Guardian. 5 April 2022. Retrieved 5 April 2022.

^ Monga, Jean Eaglesham and Vipal (20 November 2021). "Trillions in Assets May Be Left Stranded as Companies Address Climate Change". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 5 April 2022.

^ Bos, Kyra; Gupta, Joyeeta (1 October 2019). "Stranded assets and stranded resources: Implications for climate change mitigation and global sustainable development". Energy Research & Social Science. 56: 101215. Bibcode:2019ERSS...5601215B. doi:10.1016/j.erss.2019.05.025. hdl:11245.1/2da1dc94-53d0-46d2-a6fc-8f0e44c37356. ISSN 2214-6296. S2CID 198658515.

^ "No new oil, gas or coal development if world is to reach net zero by 2050, says world energy body". the Guardian. 18 May 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2021.

^ Oil fields map Archived 6 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine. quakeinfo.ucsd.edu

^ Hsu, Chang Samuel; Robinson, Paul R. (2017). Springer Handbook of Petroleum Technology (2nd, illustrated ed.). Springer. p. 360. ISBN 978-3-319-49347-3. Extract of p. 360

^ Caspar Neumann; William Lewis (1759). The Chemical Works of Caspar Neumann ... (1773 printing). J. and F. Rivington. pp. 492–.

^ 
"fossil". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) – "fossil [...] adj. [...] Obtained by digging; found buried in the earth. Now chiefly of fuels and other materials occurring naturally in underground deposits; esp. in FOSSIL FUEL n."

^ 
"fossil". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) – "fossil [...] n. [...] Something preserved in the ground, esp. in petrified form in rock, and recognizable as the remains of a living organism of a former geological period, or as preserving an impression or trace of such an organism."

^ "thermochemistry of fossil fuel formation" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 September 2015.

^ Miller, G.; Spoolman, Scott (2007). Environmental Science: Problems, Connections and Solutions. Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-0-495-38337-6. Retrieved 14 April 2018 – via Google Books.

^ Ahuja, Satinder (2015). Food, Energy, and Water: The Chemistry Connection. Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-12-800374-9. Retrieved 14 April 2018 – via Google Books.

^ "World Energy Investment 2023" (PDF). IEA.org. International Energy Agency. May 2023. p. 61. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 August 2023.

^ a b Bousso, Ron (8 February 2023). "Big Oil doubles profits in blockbuster 2022". Reuters. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. ● Details for 2020 from the more detailed diagram in King, Ben (12 February 2023). "Why are BP, Shell, and other oil giants making so much money right now?". BBC. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023.

^ "Encyclopædia Britannica, use of oil seeps in ancient times". Retrieved 9 September 2007.

^ Bilkadi, Zayn (1992). "Bulls From the Sea: Ancient Oil Industries". Aramco World. Archived from the original on 13 November 2007.

^ Ball, Max W.; Douglas Ball; Daniel S. Turner (1965). This Fascinating Oil Business. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. ISBN 978-0-672-50829-5.

^ Kaldany, Rashad (13 December 2006). Global Gas Flaring Reduction: A Time for Action! (PDF). Global Forum on Flaring & Gas Utilization. Paris: World Bank. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 September 2007. Retrieved 9 September 2007.

^ "Oil Sands Global Market Potential 2007". PRLog. 10 August 2007. Retrieved 9 September 2007.

^ Carrington, Damian (12 December 2017). "Insurance giant Axa dumps investments in tar sands pipelines". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 December 2017.

^ Eating Fossil Fuels. EnergyBulletin. Archived June 11, 2007, at the Wayback Machine

^ "Soaring fertilizer prices put global food security at risk". Axios. 6 May 2022.

^ Erisman, Jan Willem; Sutton, Mark A.; Galloway, James; Klimont, Zbigniew; Winiwarter, Wilfried (October 2008). "How a century of ammonia synthesis changed the world". Nature Geoscience. 1 (10): 636–639. Bibcode:2008NatGe...1..636E. doi:10.1038/ngeo325. S2CID 94880859. Archived from the original on 23 July 2010.

^ Butler, Sarah; Ambrose, Jillian (20 October 2021). "Fears global energy crisis could lead to famine in vulnerable countries". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 December 2022.

^ Oswald Spengler (1932). Man and Technics (PDF). Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 0-8371-8875-X. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2020. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)

^ Griffin, Rodman (10 July 1992). "Alternative Energy". CQ Researcher. 2 (2): 573–596.

^ a b Michael Stephenson (2018). Energy and Climate Change: An Introduction to Geological Controls, Interventions and Mitigations. Elsevier. ISBN 978-0128120217.

^ Neukom, Raphael; Barboza, Luis A.; Erb, Michael P.; Shi, Feng; et al. (2019). "Consistent multidecadal variability in global temperature reconstructions and simulations over the Common Era". Nature Geoscience. 12 (8): 643–649. Bibcode:2019NatGe..12..643P. doi:10.1038/s41561-019-0400-0. ISSN 1752-0908. PMC 6675609. PMID 31372180.

^ "Global Annual Mean Surface Air Temperature Change". NASA. Retrieved 23 February 2020.

^ EPA (19 January 2017). "Climate Impacts on Ecosystems". Retrieved 7 December 2020.

^ "WHO calls for urgent action to protect health from climate change – Sign the call". World Health Organization. November 2015. Archived from the original on 8 October 2015. Retrieved 7 December 2020.

^ WMO Statement on the State of the Global Climate in 2019. WMO-No. 1248. Geneva: World Meteorological Organization. 2020. ISBN 978-92-63-11248-4. Archived from the original on 10 March 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2020.

^ Gabbard, Alex. "Coal Combustion: Nuclear Resource or Danger". Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Archived from the original on 5 February 2007.

^ Aubrecht II, Gordon J. (2003). "Nuclear proliferation through coal burning" (PDF). Physics Education Research Group, Department of Physics, Ohio State University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 March 2009.

^ American Coal Ash Association. "CCP Production and Use Survey" (PDF).[permanent dead link] [dead link]

^ "Annual CO2 emissions by world region" (chart). ourworldindata.org. Our World in Data. Retrieved 18 September 2024.

^ Damian Carrington (2 December 2020). "World is 'doubling down' on fossil fuels despite climate crisis – UN report". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 December 2020.

^ Harvey, Fiona (2 December 2020). "Humanity is waging war on nature, says UN secretary general". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 December 2020.

^ "The Production Gap: The discrepancy between countries' planned fossil fuel production and global production levels consistent with limiting warming to 1.5°C or 2°C". UNEP. December 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2020.

^ a b c d e f g h Leber, Rebecca (12 August 2022). "Fight climate change. End fossilflation. Here's how". Vox. Retrieved 18 August 2024.

^ a b c Horowitz, Julia (13 December 2022). "Analysis: Inflation is finally falling. But the days when prices rose just 2% may never return | CNN Business". CNN. Retrieved 18 August 2024.

^ a b Wagner, Gernot (23 February 2024). "The Ukraine War Blew Up the World's Energy Economy". heatmap.news. Retrieved 18 August 2024. Throughout the most recent U.S. spike in inflation in 2022, the energy category alone was responsible for around half of total inflation. And that's just counting the direct effects. Indirectly, a good portion of the food price increases ever since are also due to higher energy costs. If the farmer pays more to harvest the crop, soon those commodity prices increase as well. Of course, it isn't all fossil fuels...The IRA has not and will not cut inflation overnight. But that fight is indeed a big part of the bill's legacy: Play the long game of tackling all three types of climate-related inflation — fossilflation, climateflation, and greenflation — at their very core, and indeed justify the law's name.

^ Koester, Gerrit; Lis, Eliza; Nickel, Christiane (2022). "Inflation Developments in the Euro Area Since the Onset of the Pandemic". Intereconomics. 2022 (2): 69–75.

^ Van Doorslaer, Hielke; Vermeiren, Mattias (3 September 2021). "Pushing on a String: Monetary Policy, Growth Models and the Persistence of Low Inflation in Advanced Capitalism". New Political Economy. 26 (5): 797–816. doi:10.1080/13563467.2020.1858774. ISSN 1356-3467. S2CID 230588698.

^ Wagner, Gernot (12 August 2022). "Opinion | Greening Your Home Will Be Cheaper, but Expect Growing Pains". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 18 August 2024.

^ Ritchie, Hannah; Roser, Max (2021). "What are the safest and cleanest sources of energy?". Our World in Data. Archived from the original on 15 January 2024. Data sources: Markandya & Wilkinson (2007); UNSCEAR (2008; 2018); Sovacool et al. (2016); IPCC AR5 (2014); Pehl et al. (2017); Ember Energy (2021).

^ Liodakis, E; Dashdorj, Dugersuren; Mitchell, Gary E. (2011). The nuclear alternative: Energy Production within Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia. AIP Conference Proceedings. Vol. 1342. p. 91. Bibcode:2011AIPC.1342...91L. doi:10.1063/1.3583174.

^ Chaisson, Clara (19 February 2021). "Fossil Fuel Air Pollution Kills One in Five People". NRDC. Retrieved 5 April 2022.

^ Vohra, Karn; Vodonos, Alina; Schwartz, Joel; Marais, Eloise A.; Sulprizio, Melissa P.; Mickley, Loretta J. (April 2021). "Global mortality from outdoor fine particle pollution generated by fossil fuel combustion: Results from GEOS-Chem". Environmental Research. 195: 110754. Bibcode:2021ER....19510754V. doi:10.1016/j.envres.2021.110754. PMID 33577774. S2CID 231909881.

^ Lelieveld, Jos; Haines, Andy; Burnett, Richard; Tonne, Cathryn; Klingmueller, Klaus; Munzel, Thomas; Pozzer, Andrea (29 November 2023). "Air pollution deaths attributable to fossil fuels: observational and modelling study". The BMJ. 383: e077784. doi:10.1136/bmj-2023-077784. PMC 10686100. PMID 38030155.

^ "What are the safest and cleanest sources of energy?". Our World in Data. Retrieved 29 December 2020.

^ Jogalekar, Ashutosh. "Nuclear power may have saved 1.8 million lives otherwise lost to fossil fuels, may save up to 7 million more". Scientific American Blog Network. Retrieved 29 December 2020.

^ "Energy Transition Investment Now On Par with Fossil Fuel". Bloomberg NEF (New Energy Finance). 10 February 2023. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023.

^ "Climate Frontlines Briefing – No Jobs on a Dead Planet" (PDF). International Trade Union Confederation. March 2015. Retrieved 27 March 2020.

^ a b "How just transition can help deliver the Paris Agreement | UNDP Climate Promise". climatepromise.undp.org. Retrieved 17 February 2025.

^ McCauley, Darren; Heffron, Raphael (1 August 2018). "Just transition: Integrating climate, energy and environmental justice". Energy Policy. 119: 1–7. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2018.04.014. hdl:10023/17583. ISSN 0301-4215.

^ "Divestment Commitments". Gofossilfree.org. Retrieved 11 April 2020.

^ Gulliver, Robyn (10 October 2022). "Australian Campaign Case Study : Divestment Campaign 2013 - 2021". The Commons Social Change Library. Retrieved 31 March 2024.

^ Gibson, Dylan; Duram, Leslie (2020). "Shifting Discourse on Climate and Sustainability: Key Characteristics of the Higher Education Fossil Fuel Divestment Movement". Sustainability. 12 (23): 10069. Bibcode:2020Sust...1210069G. doi:10.3390/su122310069.

^ "Divestment from Fossil Fuels". Unity College. 5 May 2020. Retrieved 29 December 2021.

^ "Fossil fuel divestment: a brief history". The Guardian. 8 October 2014. Retrieved 25 March 2015.

^ "The database of fossil fuel divestment commitments made by institutions worldwide". Global Fossil Fuel Divestment Database managed by Stand.earth. 26 July 2023.

^ Egli, Florian; Schärer, David; Steffen, Bjarne (1 January 2022). "Determinants of fossil fuel divestment in European pension funds". Ecological Economics. 191: 107237. Bibcode:2022EcoEc.19107237E. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2021.107237. hdl:20.500.11850/517323. ISSN 0921-8009.

^ Chung, Connor; Cohn, Dan. "Passive investing in a warming world". Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis. Retrieved 28 July 2024.

^ Trinks, Arjan; Scholtens, Bert; Mulder, Machiel; Dam, Lammertjan (1 April 2018). "Fossil Fuel Divestment and Portfolio Performance". Ecological Economics. 146: 740–748. Bibcode:2018EcoEc.146..740T. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.11.036. hdl:10023/16794. ISSN 0921-8009.

^ Kerr, Simeon; Massoudi, Arash; Raval, Anjli (19 December 2019). "Saudi Aramco touches $2tn valuation on second day of trading". Financial Times. Retrieved 10 January 2020.

^ Raval, Anjli; Kerr, Simeon; Stafford, Philip (5 December 2019). "Saudi Aramco raises $25.6bn in world's biggest IPO". Financial Times. Retrieved 10 January 2020.

^ a b Ritchie, Hannah (27 January 2025). "How much subsidies do fossil fuels receive?". Our World in Data.

^ "Local Environmental Externalities due to Energy Price Subsidies: A Focus on Air Pollution and Health" (PDF). World Bank.

^ "Fossil fuel subsidies: If we want to reduce greenhouse gas emissions we should not pay people to burn fossil-fuels". Our World in Data. Retrieved 4 November 2021.

^ "Protecting Nature by Reforming Environmentally Harmful Subsidies: The Role of Business". Earth Track. Retrieved 7 March 2022.

^ "Fossil Fuels Consumption Subsidies 2022 – Analysis". IEA. 16 February 2023. Retrieved 16 February 2023.

^ "Update on recent progress in reform of inefficient fossil-fuel subsidies that encourage wasteful consumption" (PDF). 2021.

^ Urpelainen, Johannes; George, Elisha (14 July 2021). "Reforming global fossil fuel subsidies: How the United States can restart international cooperation". Brookings. Retrieved 26 February 2022.

^ Martinez-Alvarez, Cesar B.; Hazlett, Chad; Mahdavi, Paasha; Ross, Michael L. (22 November 2022). "Political leadership has limited impact on fossil fuel taxes and subsidies". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 119 (47): e2208024119. Bibcode:2022PNAS..11908024M. doi:10.1073/pnas.2208024119. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 9704748. PMID 36375060.

^ Brower, Derek; Wilson, Tom; Giles, Chris (25 February 2022). "The new energy shock: Putin, Ukraine and the global economy". Financial Times. Retrieved 26 February 2022.

^ "Why fossil fuel lobbyists are dominating climate policy during Covid-19". Greenhouse PR. 23 July 2020. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 4 September 2020.

^ "Lobbying threat to global climate action". DW.COM. Deutsche Welle. 5 November 2021. Retrieved 6 April 2022.

^ Laville, Sandra (22 March 2019). "Top oil firms spending millions lobbying to block climate change policies, says report". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 25 October 2019.

^ The Guardian, 19 July 2021 "How a Powerful U.S. Lobby Group Helps Big Oil to Block Climate Action" Archived 6 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine

^ Yale Environment 360, 19 July 2019 "Fossil Fuel Interests Have Outspent Environmental Advocates 10:1 on Climate Lobbying" Archived 6 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine

^ Reuters Events, 23 November 2015 "Lobbying: Climate Change—Beware Hot Air" Archived 6 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Gaslighting: How APPEA and its members continue to oppose genuine climate action". ACCR. 14 June 2021. Retrieved 3 January 2024.

^ a b "IPCC: We can tackle climate change if big oil gets out of the way". The Guardian. 5 April 2022. Retrieved 6 April 2022.

^ "'Pushes us closer to the abyss': Former Azerbaijani oil executive to head COP29". France 24. 7 January 2024. Retrieved 10 February 2024.

^ a b "Oil and gas companies exploit coronavirus to roll back environmental regulations". DW.COM. Deutsche Welle. 16 April 2020. Retrieved 6 April 2022.

^ a b "US fossil fuel industry leaps on Russia's invasion of Ukraine to argue for more drilling". The Guardian. 26 February 2022. Retrieved 6 April 2022.

^ Manjoo, Farhad (24 March 2022). "Opinion. We're in a Fossil Fuel War. Biden Should Say So". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 6 April 2022.

^ Hodgson, Camilla (17 February 2022). "Fossil fuel and agriculture handouts climb to $1.8tn a year, study says". Financial Times. Retrieved 20 January 2024.

Further reading

Barrett, Ross; Worden, Daniel (eds.), Oil Culture. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2014.
Bob Johnson, Carbon Nation: Fossil Fuels in the Making of American Culture. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2014.

External links

Global Fossil Infrastructure Tracker Archived 10 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine
Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air

vte

Causes of climate change
Effects of climate change
Climate change mitigation
Climate change adaptation
By country and region

Climate system
Greenhouse effect (Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere)
Scientific consensus on climate change

Deforestation
Fossil fuel
Greenhouse gases
Greenhouse gas emissions
Carbon accounting
Carbon footprint
Carbon leakage
from agriculture
from wetlands
World energy supply and consumption

Carbon accounting
Carbon footprint
Carbon leakage
from agriculture
from wetlands

History of climate change policy and politics
History of climate change science
Svante Arrhenius
James Hansen
Charles David Keeling
United Nations Climate Change conferences
Years in climate change
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024

2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024

Abrupt climate change
Anoxic event
Arctic methane emissions
Arctic sea ice decline
Atlantic meridional overturning circulation
Drought
Extreme weather
Flood
Coastal flooding
Heat wave
Marine
Urban heat island
Oceans
acidification
deoxygenation
heat content
sea surface temperature
stratification
temperature
Ozone depletion
Permafrost thaw
Retreat of glaciers since 1850
Sea level rise
Season creep
Climate sensitivity
Tipping points in the climate system
Tropical cyclones
Water cycle
Wildfires

Coastal flooding

Marine
Urban heat island

acidification
deoxygenation
heat content
sea surface temperature
stratification
temperature

Biomes
Mass mortality event
Birds
Extinction risk
Forest dieback
Invasive species
Marine life
Plant biodiversity

Mass mortality event

Agriculture
Livestock
Multi-breadbasket failure
United States
Children
Cities
Civilizational collapse
Crime
Depopulation of settlements
Destruction of cultural heritage
Disability
Economic impacts
U.S. insurance industry
Fisheries
Gender
Health
Mental health
Human rights
Indigenous peoples
Infectious diseases
Migration
Poverty
Psychological impacts
Security and conflict
Urban flooding
Water scarcity
Water security

Livestock
Multi-breadbasket failure
United States

U.S. insurance industry

Mental health

Africa
Americas
Antarctica
Arctic
Asia
Australia
Caribbean
Europe
Middle East and North Africa
Small island countries
by individual country

Carbon budget
Carbon emission trading
Carbon offsets and credits
Gold Standard (carbon offset standard)
Carbon price
Carbon tax
Climate debt
Climate finance
Climate risk insurance
Co-benefits of climate change mitigation
Economics of climate change mitigation
Fossil fuel divestment
Green Climate Fund
Low-carbon economy
Net zero emissions

Gold Standard (carbon offset standard)

Carbon capture and storage
Energy transition
Fossil fuel phase-out
Nuclear power
Renewable energy
Sustainable energy

Fossil fuel phase-out

Blue carbon
Carbon dioxide removal
Carbon sequestration
Direct air capture
Carbon farming
Climate-smart agriculture
Forest management
afforestation
forestry for carbon sequestration
REDD and REDD+
reforestation
Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU)
Nature-based solutions

Carbon sequestration
Direct air capture

afforestation
forestry for carbon sequestration
REDD and REDD+
reforestation

Individual action on climate change
Plant-based diet
Solar radiation modification

Plant-based diet

Business action
Climate action
Climate emergency declaration
Climate movement
School Strike for Climate
Denial
Ecological grief
Governance
Justice
Litigation
Politics
Public opinion
Women

School Strike for Climate

Adaptation strategies on the German coast
Adaptive capacity
Disaster risk reduction
Ecosystem-based adaptation
Flood control
Loss and damage
Managed retreat
Nature-based solutions
Resilience
Risk
Vulnerability
The Adaptation Fund
National Adaptation Programme of Action

Climate Change Performance Index
Climate crisis (term)
Climate spiral
Education
Media coverage
Popular culture depictions
art
fiction
video games
Warming stripes

art
fiction
video games

Glasgow Climate Pact
Kyoto Protocol
Paris Agreement
Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement
Nationally determined contributions
Sustainable Development Goal 13
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement
Nationally determined contributions

Global surface temperature
Instrumental temperature record
Proxy
Satellite temperature measurement

Albedo
Carbon cycle
atmospheric
biologic
oceanic
permafrost
Carbon sink
Climate sensitivity
Climate variability and change
Cloud feedback
Cloud forcing
Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis
Cryosphere
Earth's energy budget
Extreme event attribution
Feedbacks
Global warming potential
Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change
Orbital forcing
Radiative forcing

atmospheric
biologic
oceanic
permafrost

Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis

Climate change scenario
Climate model
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
IPCC Sixth Assessment Report
Paleoclimatology
Representative Concentration Pathway
Shared Socioeconomic Pathways

IPCC Sixth Assessment Report

Climate change portal
 Category
 Glossary
 Index

vte

Ambient standards (US)
Index
Indoor
Law
Clean Air Act (US)
Ozone depletion

Clean Air Act (US)

Airshed
Trading
Deforestation (REDD)

Bio
Law
Resources
Fossil fuels (gas, peak coal, peak gas, peak oil)
Geothermal
Hydro
Nuclear
Solar
sunlight
shade
Wind

sunlight
shade

Agricultural
arable
peak farmland
Degradation
Field
Landscape
cityscape
seascape
soundscape
viewshed
Law
property
Management
habitat conservation
Minerals
gemstone
industrial
ore
metal
mining
law
sand
peak
copper
phosphorus
rights
Soil
conservation
fertility
health
resilience
Use
planning
reserve

arable
peak farmland

peak farmland

cityscape
seascape
soundscape
viewshed

property

habitat conservation

gemstone
industrial
ore
metal
mining
law
sand
peak
copper
phosphorus
rights

metal

law
sand

copper
phosphorus

conservation
fertility
health
resilience

planning
reserve

Biodiversity
Bioprospecting
biopiracy
Biosphere
Bushfood
Bushmeat
Fisheries
climate change
law
management
Forests
genetic resources
law
management
non-timber products
Game
law
Marine conservation
Meadow
Pasture
Plants
FAO Plant Treaty
food
genetic resources
gene banks
herbal medicines
UPOV Convention
wood
Rangeland
Seed bank
Wildlife
conservation
management

biopiracy

climate change
law
management

genetic resources
law
management
non-timber products

law

FAO Plant Treaty
food
genetic resources
gene banks
herbal medicines
UPOV Convention
wood

conservation
management

Aquifer
storage and recovery
Drinking
Fresh
Groundwater
pollution
recharge
remediation
Hydrosphere
Ice
bergs
glacial
polar
Irrigation
huerta
Marine
Rain
harvesting
Stormwater
Surface water
Sewage
reclaimed water
Watershed

storage and recovery

pollution
recharge
remediation

bergs
glacial
polar

huerta

harvesting

reclaimed water

Desalination
Floods
Law
Leaching
Sanitation
improved
Scarcity
Security
Supply
Efficiency
Conflict
Conservation
Peak water
Pollution
Privatization
Quality
Right
Resources
improved
policy

improved

improved
policy

Commons
enclosure
global
land
tragedy of
Economics
ecological
land
Ecosystem services
Exploitation
overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day
Management
adaptive
Natural capital
accounting
good
Natural heritage
Nature reserve
remnant natural area
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Wilderness

enclosure
global
land
tragedy of

ecological
land

overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day

adaptive

accounting
good

remnant natural area

Common-pool
Conflict (perpetuation)
Curse
Depletion
Extraction
Nationalism
Renewable / Non-renewable

Oil war
Petrostate
Resource war

Category

vte

History
Index
Outline

Conservation of energy
Energetics
Energy
Units
Energy condition
Energy level
Energy system
Energy transformation
Energy transition
Mass
Negative mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Power
Thermodynamics
Enthalpy
Entropic force
Entropy
Exergy
Free entropy
Heat capacity
Heat transfer
Irreversible process
Isolated system
Laws of thermodynamics
Negentropy
Quantum thermodynamics
Thermal equilibrium
Thermal reservoir
Thermodynamic equilibrium
Thermodynamic free energy
Thermodynamic potential
Thermodynamic state
Thermodynamic system
Thermodynamic temperature
Volume (thermodynamics)
Work

Units

Negative mass
Mass–energy equivalence

Enthalpy
Entropic force
Entropy
Exergy
Free entropy
Heat capacity
Heat transfer
Irreversible process
Isolated system
Laws of thermodynamics
Negentropy
Quantum thermodynamics
Thermal equilibrium
Thermal reservoir
Thermodynamic equilibrium
Thermodynamic free energy
Thermodynamic potential
Thermodynamic state
Thermodynamic system
Thermodynamic temperature
Volume (thermodynamics)
Work

Binding
Nuclear
Chemical
Dark
Elastic
Electric potential energy
Electrical
Gravitational
Binding
Interatomic potential
Internal
Ionization
Kinetic
Magnetic
Mechanical
Negative
Phantom
Potential
Quantum chromodynamics binding energy
Quantum fluctuation
Quantum potential
Quintessence
Radiant
Rest
Sound
Surface
Thermal
Vacuum
Zero-point

Nuclear

Binding

Battery
Capacitor
Electricity
Enthalpy
Fuel
Fossil
Oil
Heat
Latent heat
Hydrogen
Hydrogen fuel
Mechanical wave
Radiation
Sound wave
Work

Fossil
Oil

Latent heat

Hydrogen fuel

Bioenergy
Fossil fuel
Coal
Natural gas
Petroleum
Geothermal
Gravitational
Hydropower
Marine
Nuclear fuel
Natural uranium
Radiant
Solar
Wind

Coal
Natural gas
Petroleum

Natural uranium

Biomass
Electric power
Electricity delivery
Energy engineering
Fossil fuel power station
Cogeneration
Integrated gasification combined cycle
Geothermal power
Hydropower
Hydroelectricity
Tidal power
Wave farm
Nuclear power
Nuclear power plant
Radioisotope thermoelectric generator
Oil refinery
Solar power
Concentrated solar power
Photovoltaic system
Solar thermal energy
Solar furnace
Solar power tower
Wind power
Airborne wind energy
Wind farm

Cogeneration
Integrated gasification combined cycle

Hydroelectricity
Tidal power
Wave farm

Nuclear power plant
Radioisotope thermoelectric generator

Concentrated solar power
Photovoltaic system

Solar furnace
Solar power tower

Airborne wind energy
Wind farm

Efficient energy use
Agriculture
Computing
Transport
Energy conservation
Energy consumption
Energy policy
Energy development
Energy security
Energy storage
Renewable energy
Sustainable energy
World energy supply and consumption
Africa
Asia
Australia
Canada
Europe
Mexico
South America
United States

Agriculture
Computing
Transport

Energy development

Carbon footprint
Energy democracy
Energy recovery
Energy recycling
Jevons paradox
Waste-to-energy
Waste-to-energy plant

Waste-to-energy plant

Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataCzech RepublicSpainIsrael

NARAEncyclopedia of Modern Ukraine

Energy Renewable energy Climate change

Index
Outline
Glossary

History (timeline)

Cell theory
Ecosystem
Evolution
 Phylogeny

Properties of life

Adaptation
 Energy processing
Growth
Order
Regulation
Reproduction
Response to environment

Domains and Kingdoms of life

Archaea
Bacteria
Eukarya (Animals, Fungi, Plants, Protists)

Abiogenesis
Aerobiology
Agronomy
Agrostology
Anatomy
Astrobiology
Bacteriology
Biochemistry
Biogeography
Biogeology
Bioinformatics
Biological engineering
Biomechanics
Biophysics
Biosemiotics
Biostatistics
Biotechnology
Botany
Cell biology
Cellular microbiology
Chemical biology
Chronobiology
Cognitive biology
Computational biology
Conservation biology
Cryobiology
Cytogenetics
Dendrology
Developmental biology
Ecological genetics
Ecology
Embryology
Epidemiology
Epigenetics
Evolutionary biology
Freshwater biology
Generative biology
Genetics
Genomics
Geobiology
Gerontology
Herpetology
Histology
Human biology
Ichthyology
Immunology
Lipidology
Mammalogy
Marine biology
Mathematical biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Neontology
Neuroscience
Nutrition
Ornithology
Osteology
Paleontology
Parasitology
Pathology
Pharmacology
Photobiology
Phycology
Phylogenetics
Physiology
Pomology
Primatology
Proteomics
Protistology
Quantum biology
Relational biology
Reproductive biology
Sociobiology
Structural biology
Synthetic biology
Systematics
Systems biology
Taxonomy
Teratology
Toxicology
Virology
Virophysics
Xenobiology
Zoology

Biologist (list)
List of biology awards
List of journals
List of research methods
List of unsolved problems

Agricultural science
Biomedical sciences
Health technology
 Pharming

Biology portal
 Category

vte

Molecular biology /məˈlɛkjʊlər/ is a branch of biology that seeks to understand the molecular basis of biological activity in and between cells, including biomolecular synthesis, modification, mechanisms, and interactions.[1][2][3]

Though cells and other microscopic structures had been observed in living organisms as early as the 18th century, a detailed understanding of the mechanisms and interactions governing their behavior did not emerge until the 20th century, when technologies used in physics and chemistry had advanced sufficiently to permit their application in the biological sciences. The term 'molecular biology' was first used in 1945 by the English physicist William Astbury, who described it as an approach focused on discerning the underpinnings of biological phenomena—i.e. uncovering the physical and chemical structures and properties of biological molecules, as well as their interactions with other molecules and how these interactions explain observations of so-called classical biology, which instead studies biological processes at larger scales and higher levels of organization.[4] In 1953, Francis Crick, James Watson, Rosalind Franklin, and their colleagues at the Medical Research Council Unit, Cavendish Laboratory, were the first to describe the double helix model for the chemical structure of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which is often considered a landmark event for the nascent field because it provided a physico-chemical basis by which to understand the previously nebulous idea of nucleic acids as the primary substance of biological inheritance. They proposed this structure based on previous research done by Franklin, which was conveyed to them by Maurice Wilkins and Max Perutz.[5] Their work led to the discovery of DNA in other microorganisms, plants, and animals.[6]

The field of molecular biology includes techniques which enable scientists to learn about molecular processes.[7] These techniques are used to efficiently target new drugs, diagnose disease, and better understand cell physiology.[8] Some clinical research and medical therapies arising from molecular biology are covered under gene therapy, whereas the use of molecular biology or molecular cell biology in medicine is now referred to as molecular medicine.[citation needed]

History of molecular biology

Molecular biology sits at the intersection of biochemistry and genetics; as these scientific disciplines emerged and evolved in the 20th century, it became clear that they both sought to determine the molecular mechanisms which underlie vital cellular functions.[9][10] Advances in molecular biology have been closely related to the development of new technologies and their optimization.[11] Molecular biology has been elucidated by the work of many scientists, and thus the history of the field depends on an understanding of these scientists and their experiments.[citation needed]

The field of genetics arose from attempts to understand the set of rules underlying reproduction and heredity, and the nature of the hypothetical units of heredity known as genes. Gregor Mendel pioneered this work in 1866, when he first described the laws of inheritance he observed in his studies of mating crosses in pea plants.[12] One such law of genetic inheritance is the law of segregation, which states that diploid individuals with two alleles for a particular gene will pass one of these alleles to their offspring.[13] Because of his critical work, the study of genetic inheritance is commonly referred to as Mendelian genetics.[14]

A major milestone in molecular biology was the discovery of the structure of DNA. This work began in 1869 by Friedrich Miescher, a Swiss biochemist who first proposed a structure called nuclein, which we now know to be (deoxyribonucleic acid), or DNA.[15] He discovered this unique substance by studying the components of pus-filled bandages, and noting the unique properties of the "phosphorus-containing substances".[16] Another notable contributor to the DNA model was Phoebus Levene, who proposed the "polynucleotide model" of DNA in 1919 as a result of his biochemical experiments on yeast.[17] In 1950, Erwin Chargaff expanded on the work of Levene and elucidated a few critical properties of nucleic acids: first, the sequence of nucleic acids varies across species.[18] Second, the total concentration of purines (adenine and guanine) is always equal to the total concentration of pyrimidines (cysteine and thymine).[15] This is now known as Chargaff's rule. In 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick published the double helical structure of DNA,[19] based on the X-ray crystallography work done by Rosalind Franklin which was conveyed to them by Maurice Wilkins and Max Perutz.[5] Watson and Crick described the structure of DNA and conjectured about the implications of this unique structure for possible mechanisms of DNA replication.[19] Watson and Crick were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1962, along with Wilkins, for proposing a model of the structure of DNA.[6]

In 1961, it was demonstrated that when a gene encodes a protein, three sequential bases of a gene's DNA specify each successive amino acid of the protein.[20] Thus the genetic code is a triplet code, where each triplet (called a codon) specifies a particular amino acid. Furthermore, it was shown that the codons do not overlap with each other in the DNA sequence encoding a protein, and that each sequence is read from a fixed starting point.
During 1962–1964, through the use of conditional lethal mutants of a bacterial virus,[21] fundamental advances were made in our understanding of the functions and interactions of the proteins employed in the machinery of DNA replication, DNA repair, DNA recombination, and in the assembly of molecular structures.[22]

Griffith's experiment

In 1928, Frederick Griffith, encountered a virulence property in pneumococcus bacteria, which was killing lab rats. According to Mendel, prevalent at that time, gene transfer could occur only from parent to daughter cells. Griffith advanced another theory, stating that gene transfer occurring in member of same generation is known as horizontal gene transfer (HGT). This phenomenon is now referred to as genetic transformation.[23]

Griffith's experiment addressed the pneumococcus bacteria, which had two different strains, one virulent and smooth and one avirulent and rough. The smooth strain had glistering appearance owing to the presence of a type of specific polysaccharide – a polymer of glucose and glucuronic acid capsule. Due to this polysaccharide layer of bacteria, a host's immune system cannot recognize the bacteria and it kills the host. The other, avirulent, rough strain lacks this polysaccharide capsule and has a dull, rough appearance.[citation needed]

Presence or absence of capsule in the strain, is known to be genetically determined. Smooth and rough strains occur in several different type such as S-I, S-II, S-III, etc. and R-I, R-II, R-III, etc. respectively. All this subtypes of S and R bacteria differ with each other in antigen type they produce.[6]

Avery–MacLeod–McCarty experiment

The Avery–MacLeod–McCarty experiment was a landmark study conducted in 1944 that demonstrated that DNA, not protein as previously thought, carries genetic information in bacteria. Oswald Avery, Colin Munro MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty used an extract from a strain of pneumococcus that could cause pneumonia in mice. They showed that genetic transformation in the bacteria could be accomplished by injecting them with purified DNA from the extract. They discovered that when they digested the DNA in the extract with DNase, transformation of harmless bacteria into virulent ones was lost. This provided strong evidence that DNA was the genetic material, challenging the prevailing belief that proteins were responsible. It laid the basis for the subsequent discovery of its structure by Watson and Crick.

Hershey–Chase experiment

Confirmation that DNA is the genetic material which is cause of infection came from the Hershey–Chase experiment. They used E.coli and bacteriophage for the experiment. This experiment is also known as blender experiment, as kitchen blender was used as a major piece of apparatus. Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase demonstrated that the DNA injected by a phage particle into a bacterium contains all information required to synthesize progeny phage particles. They used radioactivity to tag the bacteriophage's protein coat with radioactive sulphur and DNA with radioactive phosphorus, into two different test tubes respectively. After mixing bacteriophage and E.coli into the test tube, the incubation period starts in which phage transforms the genetic material in the E.coli cells. Then the mixture is blended or agitated, which separates the phage from E.coli cells. The whole mixture is centrifuged and the pellet which contains E.coli cells was checked and the supernatant was discarded. The E.coli cells showed radioactive phosphorus, which indicated that the transformed material was DNA not the protein coat.

The transformed DNA gets attached to the DNA of E.coli and radioactivity is only seen onto the bacteriophage's DNA. This mutated DNA can be passed to the next generation and the theory of Transduction came into existence. Transduction is a process in which the bacterial DNA carry the fragment of bacteriophages and pass it on the next generation. This is also a type of horizontal gene transfer.[6]

Meselson–Stahl experiment

The Meselson-Stahl experiment was a landmark experiment in molecular biology that provided evidence for the semiconservative replication of DNA. Conducted in 1958 by Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl, the experiment involved growing E. coli bacteria in a medium containing heavy isotope of nitrogen (15N) for several generations. This caused all the newly synthesized bacterial DNA to be incorporated with the heavy isotope.

After allowing the bacteria to replicate in a medium containing normal nitrogen (14N), samples were taken at various time points. These samples were then subjected to centrifugation in a density gradient, which separated the DNA molecules based on their density.

The results showed that after one generation of replication in the 14N medium, the DNA formed a band of intermediate density between that of pure 15N DNA and pure 14N DNA. This supported the semiconservative DNA replication proposed by Watson and Crick, where each strand of the parental DNA molecule serves as a template for the synthesis of a new complementary strand, resulting in two daughter DNA molecules, each consisting of one parental and one newly synthesized strand.

The Meselson-Stahl experiment provided compelling evidence for the semiconservative replication of DNA, which is fundamental to the understanding of genetics and molecular biology.

Modern molecular biology

In the early 2020s, molecular biology entered a golden age defined by both vertical and horizontal technical development. Vertically, novel technologies are allowing for real-time monitoring of biological processes at the atomic level.[24] Molecular biologists today have access to increasingly affordable sequencing data at increasingly higher depths, facilitating the development of novel genetic manipulation methods in new non-model organisms. Likewise, synthetic molecular biologists will drive the industrial production of small and macro molecules through the introduction of exogenous metabolic pathways in various prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell lines.[25]

Horizontally, sequencing data is becoming more affordable and used in many different scientific fields. This will drive the development of industries in developing nations and increase accessibility to individual researchers. Likewise, CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing experiments can now be conceived and implemented by individuals for under $10,000 in novel organisms, which will drive the development of industrial and medical applications.[26]

Relationship to other biological sciences

The following list describes a viewpoint on the interdisciplinary relationships between molecular biology and other related fields.[27]

Molecular biology is the study of the molecular underpinnings of the biological phenomena, focusing on molecular synthesis, modification, mechanisms and interactions.
Biochemistry is the study of the chemical substances and vital processes occurring in living organisms. Biochemists focus heavily on the role, function, and structure of biomolecules such as proteins, lipids, carbohydrates and nucleic acids.[28]
Genetics is the study of how genetic differences affect organisms. Genetics attempts to predict how mutations, individual genes and genetic interactions can affect the expression of a phenotype[29]

While researchers practice techniques specific to molecular biology, it is common to combine these with methods from genetics and biochemistry. Much of molecular biology is quantitative, and recently a significant amount of work has been done using computer science techniques such as bioinformatics and computational biology. Molecular genetics, the study of gene structure and function, has been among the most prominent sub-fields of molecular biology since the early 2000s. Other branches of biology are informed by molecular biology, by either directly studying the interactions of molecules in their own right such as in cell biology and developmental biology, or indirectly, where molecular techniques are used to infer historical attributes of populations or species, as in fields in evolutionary biology such as population genetics and phylogenetics. There is also a long tradition of studying biomolecules "from the ground up", or molecularly, in biophysics.[30]

Techniques of molecular biology

Molecular cloning

Molecular cloning is used to isolate and then transfer a DNA sequence of interest into a plasmid vector.[31] This recombinant DNA technology was first developed in the 1960s.[32] In this technique, a DNA sequence coding for a protein of interest is cloned using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and/or restriction enzymes, into a plasmid (expression vector). The plasmid vector usually has at least 3 distinctive features: an origin of replication, a multiple cloning site (MCS), and a selective marker (usually antibiotic resistance). Additionally, upstream of the MCS are the promoter regions and the transcription start site, which regulate the expression of cloned gene.

This plasmid can be inserted into either bacterial or animal cells. Introducing DNA into bacterial cells can be done by transformation via uptake of naked DNA, conjugation via cell-cell contact or by transduction via viral vector. Introducing DNA into eukaryotic cells, such as animal cells, by physical or chemical means is called transfection. Several different transfection techniques are available, such as calcium phosphate transfection, electroporation, microinjection and liposome transfection. The plasmid may be integrated into the genome, resulting in a stable transfection, or may remain independent of the genome and expressed temporarily, called a transient transfection.[33][34]

DNA coding for a protein of interest is now inside a cell, and the protein can now be expressed. A variety of systems, such as inducible promoters and specific cell-signaling factors, are available to help express the protein of interest at high levels. Large quantities of a protein can then be extracted from the bacterial or eukaryotic cell. The protein can be tested for enzymatic activity under a variety of situations, the protein may be crystallized so its tertiary structure can be studied, or, in the pharmaceutical industry, the activity of new drugs against the protein can be studied.[35]

Polymerase chain reaction

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is an extremely versatile technique for copying DNA. In brief, PCR allows a specific DNA sequence to be copied or modified in predetermined ways. The reaction is extremely powerful and under perfect conditions could amplify one DNA molecule to become 1.07 billion molecules in less than two hours. PCR has many applications, including the study of gene expression, the detection of pathogenic microorganisms, the detection of genetic mutations, and the introduction of mutations to DNA.[36] The PCR technique can be used to introduce restriction enzyme sites to ends of DNA molecules, or to mutate particular bases of DNA, the latter is a method referred to as site-directed mutagenesis. PCR can also be used to determine whether a particular DNA fragment is found in a cDNA library. PCR has many variations, like reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) for amplification of RNA, and, more recently, quantitative PCR which allow for quantitative measurement of DNA or RNA molecules.[37][38]

Gel electrophoresis

Gel electrophoresis is a technique which separates molecules by their size using an agarose or polyacrylamide gel.[39] This technique is one of the principal tools of molecular biology. The basic principle is that DNA fragments can be separated by applying an electric current across the gel - because the DNA backbone contains negatively charged phosphate groups, the DNA will migrate through the agarose gel towards the positive end of the current.[39] Proteins can also be separated on the basis of size using an SDS-PAGE gel, or on the basis of size and their electric charge by using what is known as a 2D gel electrophoresis.[40]

The Bradford protein assay

The Bradford assay is a molecular biology technique which enables the fast, accurate quantitation of protein molecules utilizing the unique properties of a dye called Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250.[41] Coomassie Blue undergoes a visible color shift from reddish-brown to bright blue upon binding to protein.[41] In its unstable, cationic state, Coomassie Blue has a background wavelength of 465 nm and gives off a reddish-brown color.[42] When Coomassie Blue binds to protein in an acidic solution, the background wavelength shifts to 595 nm and the dye gives off a bright blue color.[42] Proteins in the assay bind Coomassie blue in about 2 minutes, and the protein-dye complex is stable for about an hour, although it is recommended that absorbance readings are taken within 5 to 20 minutes of reaction initiation.[41] The concentration of protein in the Bradford assay can then be measured using a visible light spectrophotometer, and therefore does not require extensive equipment.[42]

This method was developed in 1975 by Marion M. Bradford, and has enabled significantly faster, more accurate protein quantitation compared to previous methods: the Lowry procedure and the biuret assay.[41] Unlike the previous methods, the Bradford assay is not susceptible to interference by several non-protein molecules, including ethanol, sodium chloride, and magnesium chloride.[41] However, it is susceptible to influence by strong alkaline buffering agents, such as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS).[41]

Macromolecule blotting and probing

The terms northern, western and eastern blotting are derived from what initially was a molecular biology joke that played on the term Southern blotting, after the technique described by Edwin Southern for the hybridisation of blotted DNA. Patricia Thomas, developer of the RNA blot which then became known as the northern blot, actually did not use the term.[43]

Named after its inventor, biologist Edwin Southern, the Southern blot is a method for probing for the presence of a specific DNA sequence within a DNA sample. DNA samples before or after restriction enzyme (restriction endonuclease) digestion are separated by gel electrophoresis and then transferred to a membrane by blotting via capillary action. The membrane is then exposed to a labeled DNA probe that has a complement base sequence to the sequence on the DNA of interest.[44] Southern blotting is less commonly used in laboratory science due to the capacity of other techniques, such as PCR, to detect specific DNA sequences from DNA samples. These blots are still used for some applications, however, such as measuring transgene copy number in transgenic mice or in the engineering of gene knockout embryonic stem cell lines.[30]

The northern blot is used to study the presence of specific RNA molecules as relative comparison among a set of different samples of RNA. It is essentially a combination of denaturing RNA gel electrophoresis, and a blot. In this process RNA is separated based on size and is then transferred to a membrane that is then probed with a labeled complement of a sequence of interest. The results may be visualized through a variety of ways depending on the label used; however, most result in the revelation of bands representing the sizes of the RNA detected in sample. The intensity of these bands is related to the amount of the target RNA in the samples analyzed. The procedure is commonly used to study when and how much gene expression is occurring by measuring how much of that RNA is present in different samples, assuming that no post-transcriptional regulation occurs and that the levels of mRNA reflect proportional levels of the corresponding protein being produced. It is one of the most basic tools for determining at what time, and under what conditions, certain genes are expressed in living tissues.[45][46]

A western blot is a technique by which specific proteins can be detected from a mixture of proteins.[47] Western blots can be used to determine the size of isolated proteins, as well as to quantify their expression.[48] In western blotting, proteins are first separated by size, in a thin gel sandwiched between two glass plates in a technique known as SDS-PAGE. The proteins in the gel are then transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), nitrocellulose, nylon, or other support membrane. This membrane can then be probed with solutions of antibodies. Antibodies that specifically bind to the protein of interest can then be visualized by a variety of techniques, including colored products, chemiluminescence, or autoradiography. Often, the antibodies are labeled with enzymes. When a chemiluminescent substrate is exposed to the enzyme it allows detection. Using western blotting techniques allows not only detection but also quantitative analysis. Analogous methods to western blotting can be used to directly stain specific proteins in live cells or tissue sections.[47][49]

The eastern blotting technique is used to detect post-translational modification of proteins. Proteins blotted on to the PVDF or nitrocellulose membrane are probed for modifications using specific substrates.[50]

Microarrays

A DNA microarray is a collection of spots attached to a solid support such as a microscope slide where each spot contains one or more single-stranded DNA oligonucleotide fragments. Arrays make it possible to put down large quantities of very small (100 micrometre diameter) spots on a single slide. Each spot has a DNA fragment molecule that is complementary to a single DNA sequence. A variation of this technique allows the gene expression of an organism at a particular stage in development to be qualified (expression profiling). In this technique the RNA in a tissue is isolated and converted to labeled complementary DNA (cDNA). This cDNA is then hybridized to the fragments on the array and visualization of the hybridization can be done. Since multiple arrays can be made with exactly the same position of fragments, they are particularly useful for comparing the gene expression of two different tissues, such as a healthy and cancerous tissue. Also, one can measure what genes are expressed and how that expression changes with time or with other factors.
There are many different ways to fabricate microarrays; the most common are silicon chips, microscope slides with spots of ~100 micrometre diameter, custom arrays, and arrays with larger spots on porous membranes (macroarrays). There can be anywhere from 100 spots to more than 10,000 on a given array. Arrays can also be made with molecules other than DNA.[51][52][53][54]

Allele-specific oligonucleotide

Allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) is a technique that allows detection of single base mutations without the need for PCR or gel electrophoresis. Short (20–25 nucleotides in length), labeled probes are exposed to the non-fragmented target DNA, hybridization occurs with high specificity due to the short length of the probes and even a single base change will hinder hybridization. The target DNA is then washed and the unhybridized probes are removed. The target DNA is then analyzed for the presence of the probe via radioactivity or fluorescence. In this experiment, as in most molecular biology techniques, a control must be used to ensure successful experimentation.[55][56]

In molecular biology, procedures and technologies are continually being developed and older technologies abandoned. For example, before the advent of DNA gel electrophoresis (agarose or polyacrylamide), the size of DNA molecules was typically determined by rate sedimentation in sucrose gradients, a slow and labor-intensive technique requiring expensive instrumentation; prior to sucrose gradients, viscometry was used. Aside from their historical interest, it is often worth knowing about older technology, as it is occasionally useful to solve another new problem for which the newer technique is inappropriate.[57]

See also

Astrobiology
Central dogma of molecular biology
Genetic code
Geniom RT Analyzer, diagnostic testing instrument
Genome
Molecular biology institutes
Molecular engineering
Molecular modeling
Protein interaction prediction
Protein structure prediction
Proteome
Cell biology

References

^ Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Morgan D, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P (2014). Molecular Biology of the Cell, Sixth Edition. Garland Science. pp. 1–10. ISBN 978-1-317-56375-4.

^ Gannon F (February 2002). "Molecular biology--what's in a name?". EMBO Reports. 3 (2): 101. doi:10.1093/embo-reports/kvf039. PMC 1083977. PMID 11839687.

^ "Molecular biology – Latest research and news | Nature". nature.com. Retrieved 2021-11-07.

^ Astbury, W. T. (June 1961). "Molecular Biology or Ultrastructural Biology ?". Nature. 190 (4781): 1124. Bibcode:1961Natur.190.1124A. doi:10.1038/1901124a0. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 13684868. S2CID 4172248.

^ a b "Rosalind Franklin: A Crucial Contribution". nature.com.

^ a b c d Verma, P. S. (2004). Cell biology, genetics, molecular biology, evolution and ecology. S Chand and Company. ISBN 81-219-2442-1. OCLC 1045495545.[page needed]

^ Morange, Michel (2016). "History of Molecular Biology". Encyclopedia of Life Sciences. pp. 1–8. doi:10.1002/9780470015902.a0003079.pub3. ISBN 978-0-470-01617-6.

^ Bello, Elizabeth A.; Schwinn, Debra A. (1996-12-01). "Molecular Biology and Medicine: A Primer for the Clinician". Anesthesiology. 85 (6): 1462–1478. doi:10.1097/00000542-199612000-00029. ISSN 0003-3022. PMID 8968195. S2CID 29581630.

^ Bynum, William (February 1999). "A History of Molecular Biology". Nature Medicine. 5 (2): 140. doi:10.1038/5498. ISSN 1546-170X.

^ Morange, Michel (June 2021). A history of biology. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-18878-2. OCLC 1184123419.[page needed]

^ Fields, Stanley (2001-08-28). "The interplay of biology and technology". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 98 (18): 10051–10054. doi:10.1073/pnas.191380098. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 56913. PMID 11517346.

^ Ellis, T.H. Noel; Hofer, Julie M.I.; Timmerman-Vaughan, Gail M.; Coyne, Clarice J.; Hellens, Roger P. (November 2011). "Mendel, 150 years on". Trends in Plant Science. 16 (11): 590–596. Bibcode:2011TPS....16..590E. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2011.06.006. PMID 21775188.

^ "12.3C: Mendel's Law of Segregation". Biology LibreTexts. 2018-07-12. Retrieved 2021-11-18.

^ "Mendelian Inheritance". Genome.gov. Retrieved 2021-11-18.

^ a b Pray, L (2008). "Discovery of DNA structure and function: Watson and Crick". Nature Education. 1 (1): 100. Retrieved 2024-06-21.

^ George., Wolf (2003). Friedrich Miescher: the man who discovered DNA. OCLC 907773747.[page needed]

^ Levene, P.A. (1919). "Structure of Yeast Nucleic Acid". Journal of Biological Chemistry. 43 (2): 379–382. doi:10.1016/s0021-9258(18)86289-5. ISSN 0021-9258.

^ Chargaff, Erwin (June 1950). "Chemical specificity of nucleic acids and mechanism of their enzymatic degradation". Experientia. 6 (6): 201–209. doi:10.1007/bf02173653. PMID 15421335. S2CID 2522535.

^ a b Watson, J. D.; Crick, F. H. C. (April 1953). "Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids: A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid". Nature. 171 (4356): 737–738. Bibcode:1953Natur.171..737W. doi:10.1038/171737a0. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 13054692. S2CID 4253007.

^ Crick, F. H. C.; Barnett, Leslie; Brenner, S.; Watts-Tobin, R. J. (1961). "General Nature of the Genetic Code for Proteins". Nature. 192 (4809). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 1227–1232. Bibcode:1961Natur.192.1227C. doi:10.1038/1921227a0. ISSN 0028-0836. PMID 13882203. S2CID 4276146.

^ Epstein, R. H.; Bolle, A.; Steinberg, C. M.; Kellenberger, E.; Boy de la Tour, E.; et al. (1963-01-01). "Physiological Studies of Conditional Lethal Mutants of Bacteriophage T4D". Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology. 28. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory: 375–394. doi:10.1101/sqb.1963.028.01.053. ISSN 0091-7451.

^ Edgar, Bob (2004-10-01). "The Genome of Bacteriophage T4". Genetics. 168 (2): 575–582. doi:10.1093/genetics/168.2.575. ISSN 1943-2631. PMC 1448817. PMID 15514035.

^ Ravenhall, Matt; Škunca, Nives; Lassalle, Florent; Dessimoz, Christophe (May 2015). "Inferring Horizontal Gene Transfer". PLOS Computational Biology. 11 (5): e1004095. Bibcode:2015PLSCB..11E4095R. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004095. PMC 4462595. PMID 26020646.

^ Mojiri, Soheil; Isbaner, Sebastian; Mühle, Steffen; Jang, Hongje; Bae, Albert Johann; Gregor, Ingo; Gholami, Azam; Gholami, Azam; Enderlein, Jörg (2021-06-01). "Rapid multi-plane phase-contrast microscopy reveals torsional dynamics in flagellar motion". Biomedical Optics Express. 12 (6): 3169–3180. doi:10.1364/BOE.419099. ISSN 2156-7085. PMC 8221972. PMID 34221652.

^ van Warmerdam, T. "Molecular Biology Laboratory Resource". Yourbiohelper.com. Archived from the original on December 29, 2021.

^ van Warmerdam, T. "Molecular biology laboratory resource". Yourbiohelper.com. Archived from the original on December 29, 2021.

^ Lodish H, Berk A, Zipursky SL, Matsudaira P, Baltimore D, Darnell J (2000). Molecular cell biology (4th ed.). New York: Scientific American Books. ISBN 978-0-7167-3136-8.

^ Berg, Jeremy (2002). Biochemistry. Tymoczko, John L.; Stryer, Lubert (5th ed.). New York: W.H. Freeman. ISBN 0-7167-3051-0. OCLC 48055706.

^ Reference, Genetics Home. "Help Me Understand Genetics". Genetics Home Reference. Retrieved 31 December 2016.

^ a b Tian J, ed. (2013). Molecular Imaging: Fundamentals and Applications. Springer-Verlag Berlin & Heidelberg GmbH & Co. K. p. 542. ISBN 9783642343032. Retrieved 2019-07-08.

^ "Foundations of Molecular Cloning - Past, Present and Future | NEB". www.neb.com. Retrieved 2021-11-25.

^ "Foundations of Molecular Cloning - Past, Present and Future | NEB". www.neb.com. Retrieved 2021-11-04.

^ Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P. Isolating, Cloning, and Sequencing DNA. Retrieved 31 December 2016.

^ Lessard, Juliane C. (1 January 2013). "Molecular cloning". Laboratory Methods in Enzymology: DNA. Vol. 529. pp. 85–98. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-418687-3.00007-0. ISBN 978-0-12-418687-3. ISSN 1557-7988. PMID 24011038.

^ Kokate C, Jalalpure SS, Hurakadle PJ (2016). Textbook of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology. Expression Cloning. Elsevier. p. 125. ISBN 9788131239872. Retrieved 2019-07-08.

^ Lenstra, J. A. (July 1995). "The applications of the polymerase chain reaction in the life sciences". Cellular and Molecular Biology (Noisy-Le-Grand, France). 41 (5): 603–614. ISSN 0145-5680. PMID 7580841.

^ "Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)". National Center for Biotechnology Information. U.S. National Library of Medicine. Retrieved 31 December 2016.

^ "Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) Fact Sheet". National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI). Retrieved 31 December 2016.

^ a b Lee, Pei Yun; Costumbrado, John; Hsu, Chih-Yuan; Kim, Yong Hoon (2012-04-20). "Agarose Gel Electrophoresis for the Separation of DNA Fragments". Journal of Visualized Experiments (62): 3923. doi:10.3791/3923. ISSN 1940-087X. PMC 4846332. PMID 22546956.

^ Lee PY, Costumbrado J, Hsu CY, Kim YH (April 2012). "Agarose gel electrophoresis for the separation of DNA fragments". Journal of Visualized Experiments (62). doi:10.3791/3923. PMC 4846332. PMID 22546956.

^ a b c d e f Bradford, Marion M. (May 1976). "A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding". Analytical Biochemistry. 72 (1–2): 248–254. doi:10.1016/0003-2697(76)90527-3. PMID 942051. S2CID 4359292.

^ a b c "Protein determination by the Bradford method". www.ruf.rice.edu. Retrieved 2021-11-08.

^ Thomas PS (September 1980). "Hybridization of denatured RNA and small DNA fragments transferred to nitrocellulose". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 77 (9): 5201–5. Bibcode:1980PNAS...77.5201T. doi:10.1073/pnas.77.9.5201. PMC 350025. PMID 6159641.

^ Brown, Terry (1993). "Southern Blotting". Current Protocols in Immunology. 6: Unit 10.6A. doi:10.1002/0471142735.im1006as06. PMID 18432697.

^ Josefsen, Knud; Nielsen, Henrik (2011). "Northern Blotting Analysis". RNA. Methods in Molecular Biology. Vol. 703. pp. 87–105. doi:10.1007/978-1-59745-248-9_7. ISBN 978-1-58829-913-0. PMID 21125485.

^ He SL, Green R (1 January 2013). "Northern blotting". Laboratory Methods in Enzymology: RNA. Vol. 530. pp. 75–87. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-420037-1.00003-8. ISBN 978-0-12-420037-1. PMC 4287216. PMID 24034315.

^ a b Mahmood T, Yang PC (September 2012). "Western blot: technique, theory, and trouble shooting". North American Journal of Medical Sciences. 4 (9): 429–34. doi:10.4103/1947-2714.100998 (inactive 1 November 2024). PMC 3456489. PMID 23050259.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of November 2024 (link)

^ "Western blot | Learn Science at Scitable". www.nature.com. Retrieved 2021-11-25.

^ Kurien BT, Scofield RH (April 2006). "Western blotting". Methods. 38 (4): 283–93. doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2005.11.007. PMID 16483794.

^ Thomas S, Thirumalapura N, Crossley EC, Ismail N, Walker DH (June 2009). "Antigenic protein modifications in Ehrlichia". Parasite Immunology. 31 (6): 296–303. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3024.2009.01099.x. PMC 2731653. PMID 19493209.

^ "Microarrays". National Center for Biotechnology Information. U.S. National Library of Medicine. Retrieved 31 December 2016.

^ Bumgarner, Roger (2013). "Overview of DNA Microarrays: Types, Applications, and Their Future". Current Protocols in Molecular Biology. 101: Unit 22.1. doi:10.1002/0471142727.mb2201s101. PMC 4011503. PMID 23288464.

^ Govindarajan R, Duraiyan J, Kaliyappan K, Palanisamy M (August 2012). "Microarray and its applications". Journal of Pharmacy & Bioallied Sciences. 4 (Suppl 2): S310-2. doi:10.4103/0975-7406.100283. PMC 3467903. PMID 23066278.

^ Tarca AL, Romero R, Draghici S (August 2006). "Analysis of microarray experiments of gene expression profiling". American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. 195 (2): 373–88. doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2006.07.001. PMC 2435252. PMID 16890548.

^ Cheng L, Zhang DY, eds. (2008). Molecular genetic pathology. Totowa, NJ: Humana. p. 96. ISBN 978-1-59745-405-6. Retrieved 31 December 2016.

^ Leonard DG (2016). Molecular Pathology in Clinical Practice. Springer. p. 31. ISBN 978-3-319-19674-9. Retrieved 31 December 2016.

^ Tian J, ed. (2013). Molecular Imaging: Fundamentals and Applications. Springer-Verlag Berlin & Heidelberg GmbH & Co.K. pp. 550, 552. ISBN 9783642343032. Retrieved 2019-07-08.

Further reading

Cohen SN, Chang AC, Boyer HW, Helling RB (November 1973). "Construction of biologically functional bacterial plasmids in vitro". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 70 (11): 3240–4. Bibcode:1973PNAS...70.3240C. doi:10.1073/pnas.70.11.3240. PMC 427208. PMID 4594039.
Rodgers M (June 1975). "The Pandora's box congress". Rolling Stone. Vol. 189. pp. 37–77.
Roberts K, Raff M, Alberts B, Walter P, Lewis J, Johnson A (2002). Molecular Biology of the Cell. Garland Science. ISBN 978-0-8153-3218-3.

External links

Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries

Media related to Molecular biology at Wikimedia Commons

vte

History
Index
Glossary

DNA replication (DNA)
Transcription (RNA)
Translation (protein)

Genetic
Heredity

Genetic
Heredity

Promoter
Pribnow box
TATA box
Operon
gal operon
lac operon
trp operon
Intron
Exon
Terminator
Enhancer
Repressor
lac repressor
trp repressor
Silencer
Histone methylation

Pribnow box
TATA box

gal operon
lac operon
trp operon

lac repressor
trp repressor

Cell biology
Biochemistry
Computational biology
Developmental biology
Functional biology/medicine
Genetics

Cultured meat
Mitosis
Cell signalling
Post-transcriptional modification
Post-translational modification
Dry lab / Wet lab

Cell culture
Model organisms (such as C57BL/6 mice)
Methods
Nucleic acid
Protein
Fluorescence, Pigment & Radioactivity

Nucleic acid
Protein

Epigenetic
Genetic
Post-transcriptional
Post-translational regulation

Molecular biology
 WikiProject

vte

Outline of cell biology
History of molecular biology

Bioinformatics
Cloning
Genetic engineering
Genetically modified organisms
Stem cells
Vaccination

Cell cycle
Cell signaling
Cells
Cytoskeleton
Organelles
Membrane biology
Signal transduction
Clone (cell biology)

Ageing
Embryology
Morphogens
Gastrulation
Growth factors
Neurulation
Teratogens

Applied genetics
Chromosomes
DNA
Genetic disorders
Genetic engineering
Genes
Geneticists
Molecular genetics
Mutation
Population genetics
RNA

Antibiotics
Bacteriology
Extremophiles
Fungi
Microbiologists
Mycology
Virology
Immunology:
monoclonal antibodies
polyclonal B cell response
somatic hypermutation

monoclonal antibodies
polyclonal B cell response
somatic hypermutation

Biochemists
Biochemistry topics
Biomolecules
Molecular biology
Molecular biologists
Peptides
Proteins

Cloning
Electrophoresis
In situ hybridization
Gene knockout
Microscopes
Northern blot
Polymerase chain reaction
Southern blot
Western blot

Molecular biology
Cell biology

vte

List of life sciences
Chemistry
Biology
Chemistry fields:
Analytical chemistry
Inorganic chemistry
Medicinal chemistry
Organic chemistry
Physical chemistry
Theoretical chemistry

Molecular biology
Cell biology
Chemical biology
Bioorthogonal chemistry
Medicinal chemistry
Pharmacology
Clinical chemistry
Neurochemistry
Bioorganic chemistry
Bioorganometallic chemistry
Bioinorganic chemistry
Biophysical chemistry
Bacteriology
parasitology
virology
immunology

Bioorthogonal chemistry

Pharmacology

Chemical reactions
Chemical synthesis
Molecule
Organic reactions
Catalyst
Reagent
Reaction mechanism

Structural biology
Enzymology
Metabolism
Biomolecule

Cell theory
Ribosome
Nucleus
Peptide
Amino acids
Protein
Peptide
Hormone
Enzyme
Metabolic pathway

Genetics:
Chromosomes
RNA
DNA
Genetic code

Carbohydrates:
Alcohols
Glycoproteins
Glycosides
Lipids:
Eicosanoids
Fatty acids
Fatty-acid metabolism
Glycerides
Phospholipids
Sphingolipids
Cholesterol
Steroids
Nucleic acids:
Nucleobases
Nucleosides
Nucleotides
Nucleotide metabolism
Proteins:
Amino acids
Amino acid metabolism
Other:
Tetrapyrroles
Heme

Fatty-acid metabolism

Nucleotide metabolism

Amino acid metabolism

Artificial gene synthesis
Biomimetic synthesis
Bioretrosynthesis
Biosynthesis
Chemosynthesis
Convergent synthesis
Custom peptide synthesis
Direct process
Divergent synthesis
Electrosynthesis
Enantioselective synthesis
Fully automated synthesis
Hydrothermal synthesis
LASiS
Mechanosynthesis
One-pot synthesis
Organic synthesis
Peptide synthesis
Radiosynthesis
Retrosynthesis
Semisynthesis
Solid-phase synthesis
Solvothermal synthesis
Total synthesis
Volume combustion synthesis

{{Branches of chemistry}}
{{Cellular structures}}
{{Organic reactions}}
{{Chemical synthesis}}
{{Amino acids}}
{{Chemical bonds}}
{{Protein primary structure}}
{{Amino acid metabolism enzymes}}

{{Life on Earth}}
{{Botany}}
{{Zoology}}

Occupations
Biologist
Chemist
Bacteriologist
Microbiologist
Microscopy
Concepts:
Scientific method
Periodic table
Experiments
Notable scientists:
Robert Hooke
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
Francesco Redi

Category
 Commons
Portal

vte

Genetic code
Central dogma
DNA → RNA → Protein
Special transfers
RNA→RNA
RNA→DNA
Protein→Protein

DNA → RNA → Protein

RNA→RNA
RNA→DNA
Protein→Protein

Bacterial
Archaeal
Eukaryotic

Transcription factor
RNA polymerase
Promoter

Precursor mRNA (pre-mRNA / hnRNA)
5' capping
Splicing
Polyadenylation
Histone acetylation and deacetylation

Bacterial
Archaeal
Eukaryotic

Ribosome
Transfer RNA (tRNA)
Ribosome-nascent chain complex (RNC)
Post-translational modification

Epigenetic
imprinting
Transcriptional
Gene regulatory network
cis-regulatory element
lac operon
Post-transcriptional
sequestration (P-bodies)
alternative splicing
microRNA
Translational
Post-translational
reversible
irreversible

imprinting

Gene regulatory network
cis-regulatory element

sequestration (P-bodies)
alternative splicing
microRNA

reversible
irreversible

François Jacob
Jacques Monod

vte

Abiogenesis
Aerobiology
Agronomy
Agrostology
Anatomy
Astrobiology
Bacteriology
Biochemistry
Biogeography
Biogeology
Bioinformatics
Biological engineering
Biomechanics
Biophysics
Biosemiotics
Biostatistics
Biotechnology
Botany
Cell biology
Cellular microbiology
Chemical biology
Chronobiology
Cognitive biology
Computational biology
Conservation biology
Cryobiology
Cytogenetics
Dendrology
Developmental biology
Ecological genetics
Ecology
Embryology
Epidemiology
Epigenetics
Evolutionary biology
Freshwater biology
Generative biology
Genetics
Genomics
Geobiology
Gerontology
Herpetology
Histology
Human biology
Ichthyology
Immunology
Lipidology
Mammalogy
Marine biology
Mathematical biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Neontology
Neuroscience
Nutrition
Ornithology
Osteology
Paleontology
Parasitology
Pathology
Pharmacology
Photobiology
Phycology
Phylogenetics
Physiology
Pomology
Primatology
Proteomics
Protistology
Quantum biology
Relational biology
Reproductive biology
Sociobiology
Structural biology
Synthetic biology
Systematics
Systems biology
Taxonomy
Teratology
Toxicology
Virology
Virophysics
Xenobiology
Zoology

History of biology
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
Timeline of biology and organic chemistry

vte

History of biotechnology
Timeline of biotechnology
Competitions and prizes in biotechnology

Colors of biotechnology
Industrial biotechnology

Allele
Cell
DNA/RNA
Fermentation
Gene
Plasmid
Protein
Selective breeding

Biotechnology industrial park
Biotechnology products
Biotechnology law
Green Revolution
Human Genome Project
Pharmaceutical company

Bioreactor
Cell culture
Cultured meat
Flow cytometry
Hybridoma technology
HPLC
NMR
Spectroscopy

Centrifugation
CSTR
Crystallization
Chromatography
Kidney dialysis
Electrophoresis
Extraction
Fed Batch
Filtration
PFR
Sedimentation

Animal cell culture
Biofabrication
Bioinformatics
Biosynthesis
Bionic architecture
Cell immunity
Cloning
Reproductive cloning
Therapeutic cloning
Embryology
Environmental biotechnology
Genetic engineering
Genetically modified organism
Molecular genetics
Gene therapy
Microbial biodegradation
Omics
Pharmacogenomics
Stem cells
Telomere
Tissue culture

Reproductive cloning
Therapeutic cloning

Genetically modified organism
Molecular genetics

Bioeconomy
Bioelectronics
Bioengineering
Biology
Biopharmacology
Biomedical engineering
Biomedicine
Biomimetics
Biochemicals
Biorobotics
Chemical engineering
Microbiology
Mining
Molecular biology
Nanobiotechnology
Virology

Index of biotechnology articles
List of biotechnology articles
List of largest biomedical companies by market capitalization

Category
 Commons

vte

Glossary of chemical formulae
List of biomolecules
List of inorganic compounds
Periodic table

Calorimetry
Characterization
Chromatography
GC
HPLC
Crystallography
Electroanalytical methods
Elemental analysis
Instrumental chemistry
Mass spectrometry
EI
ICP
MALDI
Separation process
Spectroscopy
IR
Raman
UV-Vis
NMR
Titration
Wet chemistry

GC
HPLC

EI
ICP
MALDI

IR
Raman
UV-Vis
NMR

Computational chemistry
Mathematical chemistry
Molecular modelling
Molecular mechanics
Molecular dynamics
Molecular geometry
VSEPR theory
Quantum chemistry

Mathematical chemistry

VSEPR theory

Chemical kinetics
Chemical physics
Molecular physics
Chemical thermodynamics
Cryochemistry
Electrochemistry
Spectroelectrochemistry
Photoelectrochemistry
Equilibrium chemistry
Femtochemistry
Interface and colloid science
Micromeritics
Mechanochemistry
Microwave chemistry
Photochemistry
Sonochemistry
Spectroscopy
Spin chemistry
Structural chemistry
Surface science
Thermochemistry

Molecular physics

Spectroelectrochemistry
Photoelectrochemistry

Micromeritics

Ceramic chemistry
Cluster chemistry
Coordination chemistry
Magnetochemistry
Organometallic chemistry
Organolanthanide chemistry
Solid-state chemistry

Organolanthanide chemistry

Dynamic covalent chemistry
Enantioselective synthesis
Fullerene chemistry
Organic reactions
Organic synthesis
Petrochemistry
Physical organic chemistry
Polymer chemistry
Retrosynthetic analysis
Stereochemistry
Alkane stereochemistry
Total synthesis / Semisynthesis

Alkane stereochemistry

Biochemistry
Molecular biology
Cell biology
Bioinorganic chemistry
Bioorganic chemistry
Bioorganometallic chemistry
Biophysical chemistry
Chemical biology
Bioorthogonal chemistry
Clinical chemistry
Medicinal chemistry
Pharmacology
Neurochemistry

Molecular biology
Cell biology

Bioorthogonal chemistry

Pharmacology

Nuclear chemistry
Radiochemistry
Radiation chemistry
Actinide chemistry
Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry
Geochemistry
Biogeochemistry
Photogeochemistry

Radiochemistry
Radiation chemistry
Actinide chemistry

Biogeochemistry
Photogeochemistry

Environmental chemistry
Atmospheric chemistry
Ocean chemistry
Clay chemistry
Carbochemistry
Food chemistry
Carbohydrate chemistry
Food physical chemistry
Agricultural chemistry
Soil chemistry

Atmospheric chemistry
Ocean chemistry

Carbohydrate chemistry
Food physical chemistry

Soil chemistry

Chemistry education
Amateur chemistry
General chemistry
Clandestine chemistry
Forensic chemistry
Forensic toxicology
Post-mortem chemistry

Amateur chemistry
General chemistry

Forensic toxicology
Post-mortem chemistry

Nanochemistry
Supramolecular chemistry
Chemical synthesis
Green chemistry
Click chemistry
Combinatorial chemistry
Biosynthesis
Chemical engineering
Stoichiometry
Materials science
Metallurgy
Ceramic engineering
Polymer science

Supramolecular chemistry

Green chemistry
Click chemistry
Combinatorial chemistry
Biosynthesis

Stoichiometry

Metallurgy
Ceramic engineering
Polymer science

History of chemistry
Nobel Prize in Chemistry
Timeline of chemistry
of element discoveries
"The central science"
Chemical reaction
Catalysis
Chemical element
Chemical compound
Atom
Molecule
Ion
Chemical substance
Chemical bond
Alchemy
Quantum mechanics

of element discoveries

Catalysis

Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject

FAST

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataJapanCzech RepublicSpainLatviaIsrael

Biology

Prehistoric
Ancient
Medieval
Pre-Romanesque
Romanesque
Gothic
Renaissance
Mannerism
Baroque
Rococo
Neoclassicism
Revivalism
Romanticism
Realism
Pre-Raphaelites
Modern
Impressionism
Symbolism
Decorative
Post-Impressionism
Art Nouveau
Fauvism
Expressionism
Cubism
Contemporary
Postmodern
Conceptualism
Pop
Minimalism
Periods in Western art history

Pre-Romanesque
Romanesque
Gothic

Mannerism

Impressionism
Symbolism
Decorative
Post-Impressionism
Art Nouveau
Fauvism
Expressionism
Cubism

Postmodern
Conceptualism
Pop
Minimalism

Mesopotamian
Egyptian
Hittite
Persian
Arabian
South Arabian
Phoenician
Ottoman

Art of Central Asia

Art of East Asia

Chinese
Hong Kong
Taiwan
Japanese
Korean
Tibetan

Hong Kong
Taiwan

Art of South Asia

Indian
Bhutanese
Newar

Art of Southeast Asia

Indonesian
Filipino
Vietnamese
Thai
Myanmar
Malaysian
Cambodian
Khmer
Lao
Singaporean
Bruneian

Khmer

Art of Europe

Minoan
Cycladic
Etruscan
Dacian
Celtic
Scythian
Greek
Hellenistic
Iberian
Roman
Byzantine
Anglo-Saxon
Ottonian
Viking
Rus

Art of Africa

Igbo
Yoruba
Benin
Kuba
Luba

Art of the Americas

Pre-Columbian
Maya
Muisca
Inuit

Art of Oceania

Australian
Cook Islands
Hawaiian
Papuan

Buddhist
Christian
Catholic
Protestant
Hindu
Islamic
Jain
Manichaean
Sikh
Taoist
Vodou
Vodun

Catholic
Protestant

Sculpture
Painting
Pottery
Calligraphy
Architecture
Photography
Graphic arts
Digital art

Abstract
Art history
Art movement
List
Figurative
Funerary
Naïve
Narrative
Naturalist

List

vte

Modern art includes artistic work produced during the period extending roughly from the 1860s to the 1970s, and denotes the styles and philosophies of the art produced during that era.[1] The term is usually associated with art in which the traditions of the past have been thrown aside in a spirit of experimentation.[2] Modern artists experimented with new ways of seeing and with fresh ideas about the nature of materials and functions of art. A tendency away from the narrative, which was characteristic of the traditional arts, toward abstraction is characteristic of much modern art. More recent artistic production is often called contemporary art or Postmodern art.

Modern art begins with the post-impressionist painters like Vincent van Gogh, Paul Cézanne, Paul Gauguin, Georges Seurat and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec. These artists were essential to modern art's development.[3] At the beginning of the 20th century Henri Matisse and several other young artists including the pre-cubists Georges Braque, André Derain, Raoul Dufy, Jean Metzinger and Maurice de Vlaminck revolutionized the Paris art world with "wild," multi-colored, expressive landscapes and figure paintings that the critics called Fauvism.[4] Matisse's two versions of The Dance signified a key point in his career and the development of modern painting.[5] It reflected Matisse's incipient fascination with primitive art: the intense warm color of the figures against the cool blue-green background and the rhythmical succession of the dancing nudes convey the feelings of emotional liberation and hedonism.

At the start of 20th-century Western painting, and initially influenced by Toulouse-Lautrec, Gauguin and other late-19th-century innovators, Pablo Picasso made his first Cubist paintings.[6] Picasso based these works on Cézanne's idea that all depiction of nature can be reduced to three solids: cube, sphere and cone.[7] Picasso dramatically created a new and radical picture depicting a raw and primitive brothel scene with five prostitutes, violently painted women, reminiscent of African tribal masks and his new Cubist inventions.[8] Between 1905 and 1911 German Expressionism emerged in Dresden and Munich with artists like Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Wassily Kandinsky, Franz Marc, Paul Klee and August Macke.[9][10] Analytic cubism was jointly developed by Picasso and Georges Braque, exemplified by Violin and Candlestick, Paris, from about 1908 through 1912.[11] Analytic cubism, the first clear manifestation of cubism, was followed by Synthetic cubism, practiced by Braque, Picasso, Fernand Léger, Juan Gris, Albert Gleizes, Marcel Duchamp and several other artists into the 1920s. Synthetic cubism is characterized by the introduction of different textures, surfaces, collage elements, papier collé and a large variety of merged subject matter.[12][13]

The notion of modern art is closely related to Modernism.[a]

History

Roots in the 19th century

Although modern sculpture and architecture are reckoned to have emerged at the end of the 19th century, the beginnings of modern painting can be located earlier.[15] Francisco Goya is considered by many as the Father of Modern Painting without being a Modernist himself, a fact of art history that later painters associated with Modernism as a style, acknowledge him as an influence.[16][17][18] The date perhaps most commonly identified as marking the birth of modern art as a movement is 1863,[15] the year that Édouard Manet showed his painting Le déjeuner sur l'herbe in the Salon des Refusés in Paris.[19] Earlier dates have also been proposed, among them 1855 (the year Gustave Courbet exhibited The Artist's Studio) and 1784 (the year Jacques-Louis David completed his painting The Oath of the Horatii).[15] In the words of art historian H. Harvard Arnason: "Each of these dates has significance for the development of modern art, but none categorically marks a completely new beginning ....  A gradual metamorphosis took place in the course of a hundred years."[15]

The strands of thought that eventually led to modern art can be traced back to the Enlightenment.[b] The modern art critic Clement Greenberg, for instance, called Immanuel Kant "the first real Modernist" but also drew a distinction: "The Enlightenment criticized from the outside ... . Modernism criticizes from the inside."[21] The French Revolution of 1789 uprooted assumptions and institutions that had for centuries been accepted with little question and accustomed the public to vigorous political and social debate.[22] This gave rise to what art historian Ernst Gombrich called a "self-consciousness that made people select the style of their building as one selects the pattern of a wallpaper."[23]

The pioneers of modern art were Romantics, Realists and Impressionists.[24][failed verification] By the late 19th century, additional movements which were to be influential in modern art had begun to emerge: Post-Impressionism and Symbolism.

Influences upon these movements were varied: from exposure to Eastern decorative arts, particularly Japanese printmaking, to the coloristic innovations of Turner and Delacroix, to a search for more realism in the depiction of common life, as found in the work of painters such as Jean-François Millet. The advocates of realism stood against the idealism of the tradition-bound academic art that enjoyed public and official favor.[25] The most successful painters of the day worked either through commissions or through large public exhibitions of their work. There were official, government-sponsored painters' unions, while governments regularly held public exhibitions of new fine and decorative arts.

The Impressionists argued that people do not see objects but only the light that they reflect, and therefore painters should paint in natural light (en plein air) rather than in studios and should capture the effects of light in their work.[26] Impressionist artists formed a group, Société Anonyme Coopérative des Artistes Peintres, Sculpteurs, Graveurs ("Association of Painters, Sculptors, and Engravers") which, despite internal tensions, mounted a series of independent exhibitions.[27] The style was adopted by artists in different nations, in preference to a "national" style. These factors established the view that it was a "movement." These traits—establishment of a working method integral to the art, the establishment of a movement or visible active core of support, and international adoption—would be repeated by artistic movements in the Modern period in art.

Early 20th century

Among the movements that flowered in the first decade of the 20th century were Fauvism, Cubism, Expressionism, and Futurism.

In 1905, a group of four German artists, led by Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, formed Die Brücke (The Bridge) in the city of Dresden.[28] This was arguably the founding organization for the German Expressionist movement, though they did not use the word itself. A few years later, in 1911, a like-minded group of young artists formed Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider) in Munich.[29] The name came from Wassily Kandinsky's Der Blaue Reiter painting of 1903. Among their members were Kandinsky, Franz Marc, Paul Klee, and August Macke. However, the term "Expressionism" did not firmly establish itself until 1913.[30]: 274

Futurism took off in Italy a couple years before World War I with the publication of Filippo Tommaso Marinetti's Futurist Manifesto.[31] Benedetta Cappa Marinetti, wife of Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, created the second wave of the artistic movement started by her husband. "Largely thanks to Benedetta, her husband F.T. Marinetti re orchestrated the shifting ideologies of Futurism to embrace feminine elements of intuition, spirituality, and the mystical forces of the earth."[32] She painted up until his death and spent the rest of her days tending to the spread and growth of this period in Italian art, which celebrated technology, speed and all things new.[33]

During the years between 1910 and the end of World War I and after the heyday of cubism, several movements emerged in Paris. Giorgio de Chirico moved to Paris in July 1911, where he joined his brother Andrea (the poet and painter known as Alberto Savinio).[34] Through his brother, he met Pierre Laprade, a member of the jury at the Salon d'Automne where he exhibited three of his dreamlike works: Enigma of the Oracle, Enigma of an Afternoon and Self-Portrait. In 1913 he exhibited his work at the Salon des Indépendants and Salon d'Automne, and his work was noticed by Pablo Picasso, Guillaume Apollinaire, and several others. His compelling and mysterious paintings are considered instrumental to the early beginnings of Surrealism. Song of Love (1914) is one of the most famous works by de Chirico and is an early example of the surrealist style, though it was painted ten years before the movement was "founded" by André Breton in 1924. The School of Paris, centered in Montparnasse flourished between the two world wars.

World War I brought an end to this phase but indicated the beginning of many anti-art movements, such as the in Zürich and Berlin emerging Dada, including the work of Emmy Hennings, Hannah Höch, Hugo Ball and Marcel Duchamp, and of Surrealism.[35] Artist groups like de Stijl and Bauhaus developed new ideas about the interrelation of the arts, architecture, design, and art education.[36]

Modern art was introduced to the United States with the Armory Show in 1913 and through European artists who moved to the U.S. during World War I.[37]

After World War II

It was only after World War II, however, that the U.S. became the focal point of new artistic movements.[38] The 1950s and 1960s saw the emergence of Abstract Expressionism, Color field painting, Conceptual artists of Art & Language, Pop art, Op art, Hard-edge painting, Minimal art, Lyrical Abstraction, Fluxus, Happening, video art, Postminimalism, Photorealism and various other movements. In the late 1960s and the 1970s, Land art, performance art, conceptual art, and other new art forms attracted the attention of curators and critics, at the expense of more traditional media.[39] Larger installations and performances became widespread.

By the end of the 1970s, when cultural critics began speaking of "the end of painting" (the title of a provocative essay written in 1981 by Douglas Crimp), new media art had become a category in itself, with a growing number of artists experimenting with technological means such as video art.[40] Painting assumed renewed importance in the 1980s and 1990s, as evidenced by the rise of neo-expressionism and the revival of figurative painting.[41]

Towards the end of the 20th century, many artists and architects started questioning the idea of "the modern" and created typically Postmodern works.[42]

Art movements and artist groups

(Roughly chronological with representative artists listed.)

19th century

Romanticism and the Romantic movement – Francisco de Goya, J. M. W. Turner, Eugène Delacroix
Realism – Gustave Courbet, Camille Corot, Jean-François Millet, Rosa Bonheur
Pre-Raphaelites – William Holman Hunt, John Everett Millais, Dante Gabriel Rossetti
Macchiaioli – Giovanni Fattori, Silvestro Lega, Telemaco Signorini
Impressionism – Frédéric Bazille, Gustave Caillebotte, Mary Cassatt, Edgar Degas, Armand Guillaumin, Édouard Manet, Claude Monet, Berthe Morisot, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Camille Pissarro, Alfred Sisley
Post-Impressionism – Georges Seurat, Paul Cézanne, Paul Gauguin, Vincent van Gogh, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, Henri Rousseau, Henri-Jean Guillaume Martin, Albert Lebourg, Robert Antoine Pinchon
Pointillism – Georges Seurat, Paul Signac, Maximilien Luce, Henri-Edmond Cross
Divisionism – Gaetano Previati, Giovanni Segantini, Pellizza da Volpedo
Symbolism – Gustave Moreau, Odilon Redon, Edvard Munch, James Whistler, James Ensor
Les Nabis – Pierre Bonnard, Édouard Vuillard, Félix Vallotton, Maurice Denis, Paul Sérusier
Art Nouveau and variants – Jugendstil, Secession, Modern Style, Modernisme – Aubrey Beardsley, Alphonse Mucha, Gustav Klimt,
Art Nouveau architecture and design – Antoni Gaudí, Otto Wagner, Wiener Werkstätte, Josef Hoffmann, Adolf Loos, Koloman Moser
Early Modernist sculptors – Aristide Maillol, Auguste Rodin

Early 20th century (before World War I)

Abstract art – Francis Picabia, Wassily Kandinsky, František Kupka, Robert Delaunay, Sonia Delaunay, Léopold Survage, Piet Mondrian, Kazimir Malevich, Hilma af Klint
Fauvism – André Derain, Henri Matisse, Maurice de Vlaminck, Georges Braque, Kees van Dongen
Expressionism and related – Die Brücke, Der Blaue Reiter – Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Wassily Kandinsky, Franz Marc, Egon Schiele, Oskar Kokoschka, Emil Nolde, Axel Törneman, Karl Schmidt-Rottluff, Max Pechstein
Cubism – Pablo Picasso, Georges Braque, Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Fernand Léger, Robert Delaunay, Henri Le Fauconnier, Marcel Duchamp, Jacques Villon, Francis Picabia, Juan Gris
Futurism – Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, Benedetta Cappa Marinetti, Giacomo Balla, Umberto Boccioni, Carlo Carrà, Gino Severini, Natalia Goncharova, Mikhail Larionov
Orphism – Robert Delaunay, Sonia Delaunay, František Kupka
Suprematism – Kazimir Malevich, Alexander Rodchenko, El Lissitzky
Synchromism – Stanton Macdonald-Wright, Morgan Russell
Vorticism – Wyndham Lewis
Sculpture – Constantin Brâncuși, Joseph Csaky, Alexander Archipenko, Raymond Duchamp-Villon, Jacques Lipchitz, Ossip Zadkine, Henri Laurens, Elie Nadelman, Chaim Gross, Chana Orloff, Jacob Epstein, Gustave Miklos, Antoine Bourdelle
Photography – Pictorialism, Straight photography

World War I to World War II

Dada – Jean Arp, Marcel Duchamp, Max Ernst, Francis Picabia, Kurt Schwitters
Surrealism – Marc Chagall, René Magritte, Jean Arp, Salvador Dalí, Max Ernst, Giorgio de Chirico, André Masson, Joan Miró
Expressionism and related: Chaim Soutine, Abraham Mintchine, Isaac Frenkel
Pittura Metafisica – Giorgio de Chirico, Carlo Carrà, Giorgio Morandi
De Stijl – Theo van Doesburg, Piet Mondrian
New Objectivity – Max Beckmann, Otto Dix, George Grosz
Figurative painting – Henri Matisse, Pierre Bonnard
American Modernism – Stuart Davis, Arthur G. Dove, Marsden Hartley, Georgia O'Keeffe
Constructivism – Naum Gabo, Gustav Klutsis, László Moholy-Nagy, El Lissitzky, Kasimir Malevich, Vadim Meller, Alexander Rodchenko, Vladimir Tatlin
Bauhaus – Wassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee, Josef Albers
Scottish Colourists – Francis Cadell, Samuel Peploe, Leslie Hunter, John Duncan Fergusson
Social realism – Grant Wood, Walker Evans, Diego Rivera
Precisionism – Charles Sheeler, Charles Demuth
Boychukism – Mykhailo Boychuk, Sofiya Nalepinska-Boychuk, Ivan Padalka, Vasily Sedlyar
Sculpture – Alexander Calder, Alberto Giacometti, Gaston Lachaise, Henry Moore, Pablo Picasso, Julio Gonzalez

After World War II

Figuratifs – Bernard Buffet, Jean Carzou, Maurice Boitel, Daniel du Janerand, Claude-Max Lochu
Sculpture – Henry Moore, David Smith, Tony Smith, Alexander Calder, Richard Hunt, Isamu Noguchi,[43] Alberto Giacometti, Sir Anthony Caro, Jean Dubuffet, Isaac Witkin, René Iché, Marino Marini, Louise Nevelson, Albert Vrana
Abstract expressionism – Joan Mitchell, Willem de Kooning, Jackson Pollock, Arshile Gorky, Hans Hofmann, Franz Kline, Robert Motherwell, Clyfford Still, Lee Krasner,
American Abstract Artists – Ilya Bolotowsky, Ibram Lassaw, Ad Reinhardt, Josef Albers, Burgoyne Diller
Art Brut – Adolf Wölfli, August Natterer, Ferdinand Cheval, Madge Gill
Arte Povera – Jannis Kounellis, Luciano Fabro, Mario Merz, Piero Manzoni, Alighiero Boetti
Color field painting – Barnett Newman, Mark Rothko, Adolph Gottlieb, Sam Francis, Morris Louis, Kenneth Noland, Jules Olitski, Helen Frankenthaler
Tachisme – Jean Dubuffet, Pierre Soulages, Hans Hartung, Ludwig Merwart
COBRA – Pierre Alechinsky, Karel Appel, Asger Jorn
Conceptual art – Art & Language, Dan Graham, Lawrence Weiner, Bruce Nauman, Daniel Buren, Victor Burgin, Sol LeWitt
De-collage – Wolf Vostell, Mimmo Rotella
Neo-Dada – Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, John Chamberlain, Joseph Beuys, Lee Bontecou, Edward Kienholz
Figurative Expressionism – Larry Rivers, Grace Hartigan, Elaine de Kooning, Robert De Niro, Sr., Lester Johnson, George McNeil, Earle M. Pilgrim, Jan Müller, Robert Beauchamp, Bob Thompson
Feminist Art — Eva Hesse, Judy Chicago, Barbara Kruger, Mary Beth Edelson, Ewa Partum, Valie Export, Yoko Ono, Louise Bourgeois, Cindy Sherman, Kiki Smith, Guerrilla Girls, Hannah Wilke
Fluxus – George Maciunas, Joseph Beuys, Wolf Vostell, Nam June Paik, Daniel Spoerri, Dieter Roth, Carolee Schneeman, Alison Knowles, Charlotte Moorman, Dick Higgins
Happening – Allan Kaprow, Joseph Beuys, Wolf Vostell, Claes Oldenburg, Jim Dine, Red Grooms, Nam June Paik, Charlotte Moorman, Robert Whitman, Yoko Ono
Dau-al-Set – founded in Barcelona by poet/artist Joan Brossa, – Antoni Tàpies
Grupo El Paso [es; ca; pl] – founded in Madrid by artists Antonio Saura, Pablo Serrano
Geometric abstraction – Wassily Kandinsky, Kazimir Malevich, Nadir Afonso, Manlio Rho, Mario Radice, Mino Argento, Adam Szentpétery
Hard-edge painting – John McLaughlin, Ellsworth Kelly, Frank Stella, Al Held, Ronald Davis
Kinetic art – George Rickey, Getulio Alviani
Land art – Ana Mendieta, Christo, Richard Long, Robert Smithson, Michael Heizer
Les Automatistes – Claude Gauvreau, Jean-Paul Riopelle, Pierre Gauvreau, Fernand Leduc, Jean-Paul Mousseau, Marcelle Ferron
Minimal art – Sol LeWitt, Donald Judd, Dan Flavin, Richard Serra, Agnes Martin
Postminimalism – Eva Hesse, Bruce Nauman, Lynda Benglis
Lyrical abstraction – Ronnie Landfield, Sam Gilliam, Larry Zox, Dan Christensen, Natvar Bhavsar, Larry Poons
Neo-figurative art – Fernando Botero, Antonio Berni
Neo-expressionism – Georg Baselitz, Anselm Kiefer, Jörg Immendorff, Jean-Michel Basquiat
Transavanguardia – Francesco Clemente, Mimmo Paladino, Sandro Chia, Enzo Cucchi
Figuration libre – Hervé Di Rosa, François Boisrond, Robert Combas
New realism – Yves Klein, Pierre Restany, Arman
Op art – Victor Vasarely, Bridget Riley, Richard Anuszkiewicz, Jeffrey Steele
Outsider art – Howard Finster, Grandma Moses, Bob Justin
Photorealism – Audrey Flack, Chuck Close, Duane Hanson, Richard Estes, Malcolm Morley
Pop art – Richard Hamilton, Robert Indiana, Jasper Johns, Roy Lichtenstein, Robert Rauschenberg, Andy Warhol, Ed Ruscha, David Hockney
Postwar European figurative painting – Lucian Freud, Francis Bacon, Frank Auerbach, Gerhard Richter
New European Painting – Luc Tuymans, Marlene Dumas, Neo Rauch, Bracha Ettinger, Michaël Borremans, Chris Ofili
Shaped canvas – Frank Stella, Kenneth Noland, Ron Davis, Robert Mangold.
Soviet art – Aleksandr Deyneka, Aleksandr Gerasimov, Ilya Kabakov, Komar & Melamid, Alexandr Zhdanov, Leonid Sokov
Spatialism – Lucio Fontana
Video art – Nam June Paik, Wolf Vostell, Joseph Beuys, Bill Viola, Hans Breder
Visionary art – Ernst Fuchs, Paul Laffoley, Michael Bowen

Notable modern art exhibitions and museums

Austria

Leopold Museum, Vienna

Belgium

SMAK, Ghent

Brazil

MASP, São Paulo, SP
MAM/SP, São Paulo, SP
MAM/RJ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ
MAM/BA, Salvador, Bahia

Colombia

Bogotá Museum of Modern Art (MAMBO)

Croatia

Ivan Meštrović Gallery, Split
Modern Gallery, Zagreb
Museum of Contemporary Art, Zagreb

Ecuador

Museo Antropologico y de Arte Contemporaneo, Guayaquil
La Capilla del Hombre, Quito

Finland

EMMA, Espoo
Kiasma, Helsinki

France

Château de Montsoreau-Museum of Contemporary Art, Montsoreau
Lille Métropole Museum of Modern, Contemporary and Outsider Art, Villeneuve d'Ascq
Musée d'Orsay, Paris
Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, Paris
Musée National d'Art Moderne, Paris
Musée Picasso, Paris
Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art, Strasbourg
Musée d'art moderne de Troyes

Germany

Berggruen Museum, Berlin
Degenerate Art exhibition, a touring exhibition of modern art held in Nazi Germany to condemn modern art
documenta, Kassel, an exhibition of modern and contemporary art held every 5 years
Museum Ludwig, Cologne
Pinakothek der Moderne, Munich

India

National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi
National Gallery of Modern Art, Mumbai
National Gallery of Modern Art, Bangalore

Iran

Museum of Contemporary Art, Tehran

Ireland

Hugh Lane Gallery, Dublin
Irish Museum of Modern Art, Dublin

Israel

Tel Aviv Museum of Art

Italy

Palazzo delle Esposizioni
Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna
Venice Biennial, Venice
Palazzo Pitti, Florence
Museo del Novecento, Milan

Mexico

Museo de Arte Moderno, México D.F.

Netherlands

Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam
Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam

Norway

Astrup Fearnley Museum of Modern Art, Oslo
Henie-Onstad Art Centre, Oslo

Poland

Museum of Art, Łódź
National Museum, Kraków

Qatar

Mathaf: Arab Museum of Modern Art, Doha

Romania

National Museum of Contemporary Art, Bucharest

Russia

Hermitage Museum, Saint Petersburg
Pushkin Museum, Moscow
Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow

Serbia

Museum of Contemporary Art, Belgrade

Spain

Museu d'Art Contemporani de Barcelona, Barcelona
Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofía, Madrid
Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum, Madrid
Institut Valencià d'Art Modern, Valencia
Atlantic Center of Modern Art, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
Museu Picasso, Barcelona.
Museo Picasso Málaga, Málaga.

Sweden

Moderna Museet, Stockholm

Taiwan

Asia Museum of Modern Art, Taichung

United Kingdom

Estorick Collection of Modern Italian Art, London
Saatchi Gallery, London
Tate Britain, London
Tate Liverpool
Tate Modern, London
Tate St Ives

Ukraine

National Art Museum of Ukraine, Kyiv
Andrey Sheptytsky National Museum of Lviv, Lviv

United States

Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, New York
Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
Governor Nelson A. Rockefeller Empire State Plaza Art Collection, Albany, New York
Guggenheim Museum, New York City, New York, and Venice, Italy; more recently in Berlin, Germany, Bilbao, Spain, and Las Vegas, Nevada
High Museum, Atlanta, Georgia
Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Los Angeles, California
McNay Art Museum, San Antonio, Texas
Menil Collection, Houston, Texas
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts
Museum of Modern Art, New York City, New York
San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco, California
The Baker Museum, Naples, Florida
Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Whitney Museum of American Art, New York City, New York

See also

20th-century art
Art manifesto
Gesamtkunstwerk
History of painting
List of 20th-century women artists
List of modern artists
Modern architecture
Periods in Western art history
Western painting

Notes

^ "One way of understanding the relation of the terms 'modern,' 'modernity,' and 'Modernism' is that aesthetic modernism is a form of art characteristic of high or actualized late modernity, that is, of that period in which social, economic, and cultural life in the widest sense [was] revolutionized by modernity ... [this means] that Modernist art is scarcely thinkable outside the context of the modernized society of the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Social modernity is the home of Modernist art, even where that art rebels against it." — Lawrence E. Cahoone[14]

^ "In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries momentum began to gather behind a new view of the world, which would eventually create a new world, the modern world." — Lawrence E. Cahoone[20]

References

^ Atkins 1997, pp. 118–119.

^ Gombrich 1995, p. 557.

^ "Post-Impressionism | MoMA". The Museum of Modern Art. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ Rewald, Authors: Sabine. "Fauvism | Essay | The Metropolitan Museum of Art | Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History". The Met’s Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ Clement 1996, p. 114.

^ Fraser, Jennifer Lorraine. "Part 3. Genesis of Modernism". Origins of Contemporary Art, Design, and Interiors. PressBooks – via Open Library.

^ Reff, Theodore (1977-10-01). "Cézanne on Solids and Spaces". Artforum. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ Wolfe, Shira (2021-10-21). "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon: Analysis of Picasso's Iconic Painting". Artland Magazine. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ "Die Brücke (The Bridge)". The Museum of Modern Art. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ "Shows That Made Contemporary Art History". Artland Magazine. 2020-09-04. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ Rewald, Authors: Sabine. "Cubism | Essay | The Metropolitan Museum of Art | Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History". The Met’s Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ Scobie 1988, pp. 103–107.

^ John-Steiner 2006, p. 69.

^ Cahoone 1996, p. 13.

^ a b c d Arnason & Prather 1998, p. 17.

^ Lubow, Arthur (2003-07-27). "The Secret of the Black Paintings". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2024-04-28.

^ Danto, Arthur C. (2004-03-01). "Francisco de Goya". Artforum. Retrieved 2024-04-28.

^ "The unflinching eye". The Guardian. 2003-10-04. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2024-04-28.

^ Cohen, Alina (2019-03-21). "Why Manet's Masterpiece Has Confounded Historians for over a Century". Artsy. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ Cahoone 1996, p. 27.

^ Greenberg 1982, p. 5.

^ "what is Contemporary art – a definition". www.contemporary-art.com. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ Gombrich 1995, p. 477.

^ Arnason & Prather 1998, p. 22.

^ Corinth et al. 1996, p. 25.

^ Cogniat 1975, p. 61.

^ Cogniat 1975, pp. 43–49.

^ "Die Brücke (The Bridge)". The Museum of Modern Art. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ "Shows That Made Contemporary Art History". Artland Magazine. 2020-09-04. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^  Cite error: The named reference Sheppard was invoked but never defined (see the help page).

^ "Khan Academy". www.khanacademy.org. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ Conaty, Siobhan M. (2009). "Benedetta Cappa Marinetti and the Second Phase of Futurism". Woman's Art Journal. 30 (1): 19–28. JSTOR i40026522.

^ "Benedetta Cappa Marinetti". Google Arts & Culture. Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ James, Thrall Soby (1955). Giorgio de Chirico (PDF). New York: Simon and Schuste.

^ "Dada, Surrealism, and Their Heritage" (PDF). The Museum of Modern Art. March 27, 1968.

^ Bayer, Herbert (1938). Bauhaus, 1919–1928 (PDF). New York: The Museum of Modern Art: Distributed by New York Graphic Society. ISBN 0870702408. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)CS1 maint: publisher location (link)

^ Martinez, Andrew (1933). "A Mixed Reception for Modernism: The 1913 Armory Show at the Art Institute of Chicago". One Hundred Years at the Art Institute: A Centennial Celebration (PDF). Vol. 19. Art Institute of Chicago Museum. pp. 30–57+102–105.

^ Saunders 2013.

^ Mullins 2006, p. 14.

^ Mullins 2006, p. 9.

^ Mullins 2006, pp. 14–15.

^ Jencks 1987, p. [page needed].

^ Lander 2006.

Sources

Arnason, H. Harvard; Prather, Marla (1998). History of modern art: painting, sculpture, architecture, photography (4th ed.). New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. ISBN 978-0-8109-3439-9. OCLC 1035593323 – via Internet Archive.
Atkins, Robert (1997). Artspeak: A Guide to Contemporary Ideas, Movements, and Buzzwords (2nd ed.). New York: Abbeville Press Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7892-0415-8. OCLC 605278894 – via Internet Archive.
Cahoone, Lawrence (1996). From Modernism to Postmodernism: An Anthology. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 978-1-55786-602-8. OCLC 1149327777 – via Internet Archive.
"CIMA Art Gallery". Times of India Travel. 2015-06-30. Retrieved 2021-06-12.
Clement, Russell (1996). Four French Symbolists: A Sourcebook on Pierre Puvis de Chavannes, Gustave Moreau, Odilon Redon, and Maurice Denis. Westport, CN: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-29752-6. OCLC 34191505.
Cogniat, Raymond (1975). Pissarro. New York: Crown Publishers. ISBN 978-0-517-52477-0. OCLC 2082821.
Corinth, Lovis; Schuster, Peter-Klaus; Vitali, Christoph; Butts, Barbara; Brauner, Lothar; Bärnreuther, Andrea (1996). Lovis Corinth. Munich; New York: Prestel. ISBN 978-3-7913-1682-6. OCLC 35280519.
Greenberg, Clement (1982). "Modernist Painting". In Frascina, Francis; Harrison, Charles; Paul, Deirdre (eds.). Modern Art and Modernism: A Critical Anthology. In association with the Open University. London: Harper & Row. ISBN 978-0-06-318234-9. OCLC 297414909 – via Internet Archive.
Gombrich, Ernst H. (1995). The Story of Art. London: Phaidon Press Limited. ISBN 978-0-7148-3355-2. OCLC 1151352542 – via Internet Archive.
Jencks, Charles (1987). Post-Modernism: The New Classicism in Art and Architecture. New York: Rizzoli. ISBN 978-0-8478-0835-9. OCLC 1150952960 – via Inernet Archive.
John-Steiner, Vera (2006). "Patterns of Collaboration among Artists". Creative Collaboration. Oxford University Press. pp. 63–96. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195307702.003.0004. ISBN 978-0-19-530770-2. OCLC 5105130725, 252638637.
Lander, David (November–December 2006). "Fifties Furniture – The Side Tav\ble as Sculpture". Shopping. American Heritage. 57 (6). American Association for State and Local History. ISSN 2161-8496. OCLC 60622066. Archived from the original on 2007-10-20.
Mullins, Charlotte (2006). Painting people: figure painting today. New York: D.A.P./Distributed Art Pubs. ISBN 978-1-933045-38-2. OCLC 71679906.
Saunders, Frances Stonor (2013-06-14) [1995-10-22]. "Modern art was CIA 'weapon'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 2022-05-15. Retrieved 2021-04-17.
Scobie, Stephen (1988). "The Allure of Multiplicity: Metaphor and Metonymy in Cubism and Gertrude Stein". In Neuman, S. C.; Nadel, Ira Bruce (eds.). Gertrude Stein and the Making of Literature. London: Palgrave Macmillan. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-08541-5_7. ISBN 978-1-349-08543-9. OCLC 7323640453 – via Internet Archive.

Further reading

Adams, Hugh (1979). Modern Painting. New York: Mayflower Books. ISBN 978-0-8317-6062-5. OCLC 691113035 – via Internet Archive.
Childs, Peter (2000). Modernism. London New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-203-13116-9. OCLC 48138104 – via Internet Archive.
Crouch, Christopher (1999). Modernism in Art, Design and Architecture. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-21830-0. OCLC 1036752206 – via Internet Archive.
Dempsey, Amy (2002). Art in the Modern Era: A Guide to Schools and Movements. New York: Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-0-8109-4172-4. OCLC 47623954.
Everdell, William (1997). The First Moderns: Profiles in the Origins of Twentieth-Century Thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-22484-8. OCLC 45733213 – via Internet Archive.See also: The First Moderns.
Frazier, Nancy (2000). The Penguin Concise Dictionary of Art History. New York: Penguin Reference. ISBN 978-0-14-051420-9. OCLC 70498418.
Hunter, Sam; Jacobus, John M; Wheeler, Daniel (2005). Modern Art: painting, sculpture, architecture, photography (3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-150519-3. OCLC 1114759321.
Kolocotroni, Vassiliki; Goldman, Jane; Taxidou, Olga, eds. (1998). Modernism: An Anthology of Sources and Documents. Edinburgh; Chicago: Edinburgh University Press; The University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-585-19313-7. OCLC 1150833644, 44964346 – via Internet Archive.
Lynton, Norbert (1980). The Story of Modern Art. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. ISBN 9780801413513.
Ozenfant, Amédée; Rodker, John (1952). Foundations of Modern Art. New York: Dover. ISBN 9780486202150. OCLC 1200478998. Retrieved 2021-04-19 – via Internet Archive. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)
Read, Herbert Edward; Read, Benedict; Tisdall, Caroline; Feaver, William (1975). A Concise History of Modern Painting. New York: Praeger Publishers. ISBN 978-0-275-71730-8. OCLC 741987800, 894774214, 563965849 – via Internet Archive.

External links

Tate Modern
The Museum of Modern Art
Modern artists and art
A TIME Archives Collection of Modern Art's perception (archived 2 September 2010)
National Gallery of Modern Art – Govt. of India

vte

Acmeism
Art Deco
Art Nouveau
Ashcan School
Constructivism
Cubism
Dada
Expressionism
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
Music
Fauvism
Functionalism
Bauhaus
Futurism
Imagism
Lettrism
Neoplasticism
De Stijl
Orphism
Surrealism
Symbolism
Synchromism
Tonalism

Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
Music

Bauhaus

De Stijl

Apollinaire
Barnes
Beckett
Bely 
Breton
Broch 
Bulgakov
Chekhov
Conrad
Döblin
Forster
Faulkner
Flaubert
Ford
Gide
Hamsun
Hašek
Hemingway
Hesse
Joyce
Kafka
Koestler
Lawrence
Mann
Mansfield
Marinetti
Musil
Dos Passos 
Platonov 
Porter
Proust
Stein
Svevo
Unamuno 
Woolf

Akhmatova
Aldington
Auden
Cendrars
Crane
H.D.
Desnos
Eliot
Éluard
Elytis
George
Jacob
Lorca
Lowell (Amy)
Lowell (Robert)
Mallarmé
Moore
Owen
Pessoa
Pound
Rilke
Seferis
Stevens
Thomas
Tzara
Valéry
Williams
Yeats

In Search of Lost Time (1913–1927)
The Metamorphosis (1915)
Ulysses (1922)
The Waste Land (1922)
The Magic Mountain (1924)
Mrs Dalloway (1925)
The Sun Also Rises (1926)
The Master and Margarita (1928–1940)
The Sound and the Fury (1929)

Albers
Arp
Balthus
Bellows
Boccioni
Bonnard
Brâncuși
Braque
Calder
Cassatt
Cézanne
Chagall
Chirico
Claudel
Dalí
Degas
Delaunay
Delaunay
Demuth
Dix
Doesburg
Duchamp
Dufy
Ensor
Ernst
Gauguin
Giacometti
Goncharova
Gris
Grosz
Höch
Hopper
Kahlo
Kandinsky
Kirchner
Klee
Kokoschka
Kooning
Léger
Magritte
Malevich
Manet
Marc
Matisse
Metzinger
Miró
Modigliani
Mondrian
Monet
Moore
Munch
Nolde
O'Keeffe
Picabia
Picasso
Pissarro
Ray
Redon
Renoir
Rodin
Rousseau
Schiele
Seurat
Signac
Sisley
Soutine
Steichen
Stieglitz
Toulouse-Lautrec
Van Gogh
Vuillard
Wood

Akerman 
Aldrich
Antonioni
Avery
Bergman
Bresson
Buñuel
Carné
Cassavetes
Chaplin
Clair
Cocteau
Dassin
Deren
Dovzhenko
Dreyer
Edwards
Eisenstein
Epstein
Fassbinder
Fellini
Flaherty
Ford
Fuller
Gance
Godard
Hitchcock
Hubley
Jones
Keaton
Kubrick
Kuleshov
Kurosawa
Lang
Losey
Lupino
Marker
Minnelli
Murnau
Ozu
Pabst
Pudovkin
Ray (Nicholas)
Ray (Satyajit)
Resnais
Renoir
Richardson
Rossellini
Sirk
Sjöström
Sternberg
Tarkovsky
Tati
Trnka
Truffaut
Varda
Vertov
Vigo
Welles
Wiene
Wood

Breuer
Bunshaft
Gaudí
Gropius
Guimard
Horta
Hundertwasser
Johnson
Kahn
Le Corbusier
Loos
Melnikov
Mendelsohn
Mies
Nervi
Neutra
Niemeyer
Rietveld
Saarinen
Steiner
Sullivan
Tatlin
Wright

A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte (1886)
Mont Sainte-Victoir (1887)
The Starry Night (1889)
Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907)
The Dance (1909–1910)
Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912)
Black Square (1915)
The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920)
Ballet Mécanique (1923)
Battleship Potemkin (1925)
Metropolis (1927)
Un Chien Andalou (1929)
Villa Savoye (1931)
Fallingwater (1936)
Citizen Kane (1941)
Meshes of the Afternoon (1943)

Antheil
Bartók
Berg
Berio
Boulanger
Boulez
Copland
Debussy
Dutilleux
Falla
Feldman
Górecki
Hindemith
Honegger
Ives
Janáček
Ligeti
Lutosławski
Milhaud
Nono
Partch
Russolo
Satie
Schaeffer
Schoenberg
Scriabin
Stockhausen
Strauss
Stravinsky
Szymanowski
Varèse
Villa-Lobos
Webern
Weill

Anderson
Anouilh
Artaud
Beckett
Brecht
Chekhov
Ibsen
Jarry
Kaiser
Maeterlinck
Mayakovsky
O'Casey
O'Neill
Osborne
Pirandello
Piscator
Strindberg
Toller
Wedekind
Wilder
Witkiewicz

Balanchine
Cunningham
Diaghilev
Duncan
Fokine
Fuller
Graham
Holm
Laban
Massine
Nijinsky
Shawn
Sokolow
St. Denis
Tamiris
Wiesenthal
Wigman

Don Juan (1888)
Ubu Roi (1896)
Verklärte Nacht (1899)
Pelléas et Mélisande (1902)
Salome (1905)
The Firebird (1910)
Afternoon of a Faun (1912)
The Rite of Spring (1913)
Fountain (1917)
Six Characters in Search of an Author (1921)
The Threepenny Opera (1928)
Waiting for Godot (1953)

American modernism
Armory Show
Avant-garde
Ballets Russes
Bloomsbury Group
Buddhist modernism
Classical Hollywood cinema
Degenerate art
Ecomodernism
Experimental film
Film noir
Fin de siècle
Fourth dimension in art
Fourth dimension in literature
Grosvenor School of Modern Art
Hanshinkan Modernism
High modernism
Hippie modernism
Impressionism
Music
Literature
Post-
Incoherents
International Style
Late modernism
Late modernity
List of art movements
List of avant-garde artists
List of modernist poets
Maximalism
Metamodernism
Modernity
Neo-primitivism
Neo-romanticism
New Hollywood
New Objectivity
Poetic realism
Pop Art
Pulp noir
Reactionary modernism
Remodernism
Second Viennese School
Structural film
Underground film
Vulgar modernism

Music
Literature
Post-

vte

Thracian
Dacian
Nuragic
Aegean
Cycladic
Minoan
Minyan ware
Mycenaean
Greek
Sub-Mycenaean
Protogeometric
Geometric
Orientalizing
Archaic
Black-figure
Red-figure
Severe style
Classical
Kerch style
Hellenistic
"Baroque"
Indo-Greek
Greco-Buddhist
Neo-Attic
Etruscan
Scythian
Iberian
Gaulish
Roman
Republican
Gallo-Roman
Julio-Claudian
Pompeian Styles
Trajanic
Severan

Dacian

Cycladic
Minoan
Minyan ware
Mycenaean

Sub-Mycenaean
Protogeometric
Geometric
Orientalizing
Archaic
Black-figure
Red-figure
Severe style
Classical
Kerch style
Hellenistic
"Baroque"
Indo-Greek
Greco-Buddhist
Neo-Attic

"Baroque"
Indo-Greek
Greco-Buddhist
Neo-Attic

Greco-Buddhist

Republican
Gallo-Roman
Julio-Claudian
Pompeian Styles
Trajanic
Severan

Late antique
Early Christian
Coptic
Ethiopian
Migration Period
Anglo-Saxon
Hunnic
Insular
Lombard
Visigothic
Donor portrait
Pictish
Mozarabic
Repoblación
Viking
Byzantine
Iconoclast
Macedonian
Palaeologan
Italo-Byzantine
Frankish
Merovingian
Carolingian
Pre-Romanesque
Ottonian
Romanesque
Mosan
Spanish
Norman
Norman-Sicilian
Opus Anglicanum
Gothic
Gothic art in Milan
International Gothic
International Gothic art in Italy
Lucchese school
Crusades
Moscow school
Novgorod school
Duecento
Sienese school
Mudéjar
Medieval cartography
Italian school
Majorcan school
Mappa mundi

Early Christian

Ethiopian

Anglo-Saxon
Hunnic
Insular
Lombard
Visigothic

Repoblación

Iconoclast
Macedonian
Palaeologan
Italo-Byzantine

Merovingian
Carolingian
Pre-Romanesque

Mosan
Spanish

Norman-Sicilian

Gothic art in Milan
International Gothic
International Gothic art in Italy

Sienese school

Italian school
Majorcan school
Mappa mundi

Italian Renaissance
Trecento
Proto-Renaissance
Florentine school
Pittura infamante
Quattrocento
Ferrarese school
Forlivese school
Venetian school
Cinquecento
High Renaissance
Bolognese school
Mannerism
Counter-Maniera
Northern Renaissance
Early Netherlandish
World landscape
Ghent–Bruges school
Northern Mannerism
German Renaissance
Cologne school
Danube school
Dutch and Flemish Renaissance
Antwerp Mannerism
Romanism
Still life
English Renaissance
Tudor court
Cretan school
Turquerie
Fontainebleau school
Art of the late 16th century in Milan

Trecento
Proto-Renaissance
Florentine school
Pittura infamante
Quattrocento
Ferrarese school
Forlivese school
Venetian school
Cinquecento
High Renaissance
Bolognese school
Mannerism
Counter-Maniera

Proto-Renaissance
Florentine school
Pittura infamante

Ferrarese school
Forlivese school
Venetian school

High Renaissance
Bolognese school
Mannerism
Counter-Maniera

Early Netherlandish
World landscape
Ghent–Bruges school
Northern Mannerism
German Renaissance
Cologne school
Danube school
Dutch and Flemish Renaissance
Antwerp Mannerism
Romanism
Still life

World landscape

Cologne school
Danube school

Antwerp Mannerism
Romanism
Still life

Tudor court

Baroque
Baroque in Milan
Flemish Baroque
Caravaggisti
in Utrecht
Tenebrism
Louis XIII style
Lutheran Baroque
Stroganov school
Animal painting
Guild of Romanists
Dutch Golden Age
Delft school
Capriccio
Heptanese school
Classicism
Louis XIV style
Poussinists and Rubenists

Baroque in Milan
Flemish Baroque
Caravaggisti
in Utrecht
Tenebrism
Louis XIII style
Lutheran Baroque

in Utrecht
Tenebrism

Delft school

Louis XIV style
Poussinists and Rubenists

Rococo
Rocaille
Louis XV style
Frederician
Chinoiserie
Fête galante
Neoclassicism
Goût grec
Louis XVI style
Adam style
Directoire style
Neoclassical architecture in Milan
Picturesque

Rocaille
Louis XV style
Frederician
Chinoiserie
Fête galante

Goût grec
Louis XVI style
Adam style
Directoire style
Neoclassical architecture in Milan

Art of the African diaspora
African-American
Caribbean
Haitian
Colonial Asian art
Arts in the Philippines
Letras y figuras
Tipos del País
Colonial Asian Baroque
Company style
Latin American art
Casta painting
Indochristian art
Chilote school
Cuzco school
Quito school
Latin American Baroque

African-American
Caribbean
Haitian

Haitian

Arts in the Philippines
Letras y figuras
Tipos del País
Colonial Asian Baroque
Company style

Letras y figuras
Tipos del País

Casta painting
Indochristian art
Chilote school
Cuzco school
Quito school
Latin American Baroque

Chilote school
Cuzco school
Quito school

Islamic
Moorish
Manichaean
Mughal
Qajar
Qing handicrafts
Western influence in Japan
Akita ranga
Uki-e

Moorish

Akita ranga
Uki-e

Romanticism
Fairy painting
Danish Golden Age
Troubadour style
Nazarene movement
Purismo
Shoreham Ancients
Düsseldorf school
Pre-Raphaelites
Hudson River School
American luminism
Orientalism
Norwich school
Empire style
Historicism
Revivalism
Biedermeier
Realism
Barbizon school
Costumbrismo
Verismo
Macchiaioli
Academic art
Munich school
in Greece
Neo-Grec
Etching revival

Fairy painting
Danish Golden Age
Troubadour style
Nazarene movement
Purismo
Shoreham Ancients
Düsseldorf school
Pre-Raphaelites
Hudson River School
American luminism

American luminism

Revivalism

Barbizon school
Costumbrismo
Verismo
Macchiaioli

Macchiaioli

Munich school
in Greece
Neo-Grec

in Greece

Neo-romanticism
National romanticism
Yōga
Nihonga
Japonisme
Anglo-Japanese style
Beuron school
Hague school
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
American
Hoosier Group
Boston school
Amsterdam
Canadian
Heidelberg school
Aestheticism
Arts and Crafts
Art pottery
Tonalism
Decadent movement
Symbolism
Romanian
Russian
Volcano school
Incoherents
Post-Impressionism
Neo-Impressionism
Luminism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Pont-Aven School
Cloisonnism
Synthetism
Les Nabis
American Barbizon school
California tonalism
Costumbrismo

National romanticism

Anglo-Japanese style

American
Hoosier Group
Boston school
Amsterdam
Canadian
Heidelberg school

Hoosier Group
Boston school

Art pottery

Romanian
Russian

Neo-Impressionism
Luminism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Pont-Aven School
Cloisonnism
Synthetism
Les Nabis

Luminism

California tonalism

Art Nouveau
Art Nouveau in Milan
Primitivism
California Impressionism
Secessionism
School of Paris
Munich Secession
Vienna Secession
Berlin Secession
Sonderbund
Pennsylvania Impressionism
Mir iskusstva
Ten American Painters
Fauvism
Expressionism
Die Brücke
Der Blaue Reiter
Noucentisme
Deutscher Werkbund
American Realism
Ashcan school
Cubism
Proto-Cubism
Orphism
A Nyolcak
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Futurism
Cubo-Futurism
Art Deco
Metaphysical
Rayonism
Productivism
Synchromism
Vorticism

Art Nouveau in Milan

Munich Secession
Vienna Secession
Berlin Secession
Sonderbund

Die Brücke
Der Blaue Reiter

Ashcan school

Proto-Cubism
Orphism

Cubo-Futurism

Sosaku-hanga
Suprematism
School of Paris
Crystal Cubism
Constructivism
Latin American
Universal Constructivism
Dada
Shin-hanga
Neoplasticism
De Stijl
Purism
Return to order
Novecento Italiano
Figurative Constructivism
Stupid
Cologne Progressives
Arbeitsrat für Kunst
November Group
Australian tonalism
Dresden Secession
Social realism
Functionalism
Bauhaus
Kinetic art
Anthropophagy
Mingei
Group of Seven
New Objectivity
Grosvenor school
Neues Sehen
Surrealism
Iranian
Latin American
Mexican muralism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Aeropittura
Asso
Scuola Romana
Cercle et Carré
The Group
Harlem Renaissance
Kapists
Regionalism
California Scene Painting
Heroic realism
Socialist realism
Nazi art
Streamline Moderne
Concrete art
Abstraction-Création
Tiki
The Ten
Dimensionism
Boston Expressionism
Leningrad school

Latin American
Universal Constructivism

Universal Constructivism

De Stijl

Novecento Italiano

Stupid
Cologne Progressives

November Group

Bauhaus

Iranian
Latin American

California Scene Painting

Socialist realism
Nazi art

Abstraction-Création

International Typographic Style
Abstract expressionism
Washington Color School
Visionary art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Spatialism
Color field
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
Arte Informale
COBRA
Nuagisme
Generación de la Ruptura
Jikken Kōbō
Metcalf Chateau
Mono-ha
Nanyang Style
Action painting
American Figurative Expressionism
in New York
New media art
New York school
Hard-edge painting
Bay Area Figurative Movement
Les Plasticiens
Gutai Art Association
Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai
Pop art
Situationist International
Soviet Nonconformist
Ukrainian underground
Lettrism
Letterist International
Ultra-Lettrist
Florida Highwaymen
Cybernetic art
Antipodeans

Washington Color School

Vienna School of Fantastic Realism

Tachisme
Arte Informale
COBRA
Nuagisme

in New York

Ukrainian underground

Letterist International
Ultra-Lettrist

Otra Figuración
Afrofuturism
Nueva Presencia
ZERO
Happening
Neo-Dada
Neo-Dada Organizers
Op art
Nouveau réalisme
Nouvelle tendance
Capitalist realism
Art & Language
Arte Povera
Black Arts Movement
The Caribbean Artists Movement
Chicano art movement
Conceptual art
Land art
Systems art
Video art
Minimalism
Fluxus
Generative art
Post-painterly abstraction
Intermedia
Psychedelic art
Nut Art
Photorealism
Environmental art
Performance art
Process art
Institutional critique
Light and Space
Street art
Feminist art movement
in the US
Saqqakhaneh movement
The Stars Art Group
Tropicália
Yoru no Kai
Artificial intelligence art

Neo-Dada Organizers

in the US

Post-conceptual art
Installation art
Artscene
Postminimalism
Endurance art
Sots Art
Moscow Conceptualists
Pattern and Decoration
Pliontanism
Punk art
Neo-expressionism
Transavantgarde
Saint Soleil school
Guerrilla art
Lowbrow art
Telematic art
Appropriation art
Neo-conceptual art
New European Painting
Tunisian collaborative painting
Memphis Group
Cyberdelic
Neue Slowenische Kunst
Scratch video
Transgressive
Retrofuturism
Young British Artists
Superfiction
Taring Padi
Superflat
New Leipzig school
Artist-run initiative
Artivism
The Designers Republic
Grunge design
Verdadism
Chinese Apartment Art

Moscow Conceptualists

Transavantgarde

Amazonian pop art
Altermodern
Art for art
Art game
Art intervention
Brandalism
Classical Realism
Contemporary African art
Africanfuturism
Contemporary Indigenous Australian art
Crypto art
Cyborg art
Excessivism
Fictive art
Flat design
Corporate Memphis
Hypermodernism
Hyperrealism
Idea art
Internet art
Post-Internet
iPhone art
Kitsch movement
Lightpainting
Massurrealism
Modern European ink painting
Neo-futurism
Neomodern
Neosymbolism
Passionism
Post-YBAs
Relational art
Skeuomorphism
Software art
Sound art
Stuckism
Superflat
SoFlo Superflat
Superstroke
Toyism
Unilalianism
Vaporwave
Walking Artists Network

Africanfuturism

Corporate Memphis

Post-Internet

SoFlo Superflat
Superstroke

History of art
Abstract art
Asemic writing
Anti-art
Avant-garde
Ballets Russes
Christian art
Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation
Catholic art
Icon
Lutheran art
Digital art
Fantastic art
Folk art
Hierarchy of genres
Genre painting
History painting
Illuminated manuscript
Illustration
Interactive art
Jewish art
Kitsch
Landscape painting
Modernism
Modern sculpture
Late modernism
Naïve art
Outsider art
Portrait
Prehistoric European art
Queer art
Realism
Shock art
Trompe-l'œil
Western painting

Asemic writing

Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation
Catholic art
Icon
Lutheran art

Genre painting
History painting

Modern sculpture
Late modernism

Category

United StatesCzech RepublicIsrael

Big Ben is the nickname for the Great Bell of the Great Clock of Westminster,[1][2] and, by extension, for the clock tower itself,[3] which stands at the north end of the Palace of Westminster in London, England.[4] Originally known simply as the Clock Tower, it was renamed Elizabeth Tower, in 2012, to mark the Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II. The clock is a striking clock, with five bells.[5]

The tower was designed by Sir Charles Barry and Augustus Pugin in a Perpendicular Gothic Revival style and was completed in 1859. It is elaborately decorated with stone carvings and features symbols related to the four nations of the United Kingdom and the Anglo-Welsh Tudor dynasty. A Latin inscription celebrates Queen Victoria, in whose reign the palace was built.[6] The tower stands 316 feet (96 m) tall, and the climb from ground level to the belfry is 334 steps. Its base is square, measuring 40 feet (12 m) on each side. The dials of the clock are 22.5 feet (6.9 m) in diameter.

The clock uses its original mechanism and was the largest and most accurate four-faced striking and chiming clock in the world upon its completion.[7] It was designed by Edmund Beckett Denison and George Airy, the Astronomer Royal, and constructed by Edward John Dent and Frederick Dent. It is known for its reliability, and can be adjusted by adding or removing pre-decimal pennies from the pendulum. The Great Bell was cast by the Whitechapel Bell Foundry and weighs 13.5 long tons (13.7 tonnes; 15.1 short tons).[4] Its nickname is derived from that of Sir Benjamin Hall, who oversaw its installation, although it is sometimes attributed to heavyweight boxing champion Benjamin Caunt. There are four quarter bells, which chime on the quarter hours.

Big Ben is a British cultural icon. It is one of the most prominent symbols of the United Kingdom and parliamentary democracy,[8] and it is often used in the establishing shot of films set in London.[9] The clock tower has been part of a Grade I listed building since 1970 and a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1987.[10] The clock and tower were renovated between 2017 and 2021, during which the bells remained silent with few exceptions.[11]

Tower

History

Elizabeth Tower, originally named the Clock Tower, and popularly known as "Big Ben",[12] was built as a part of Charles Barry's design for a new Palace of Westminster after the old palace was largely destroyed by fire on 16 October 1834.[13] Although Barry was the chief architect of the neo-gothic palace, he turned to Augustus Pugin for the design of the Clock Tower, which resembles earlier Pugin designs, including one for Scarisbrick Hall in Lancashire.[14] Construction of the tower began on 28 September 1843. The building contractors were Thomas Grissell and Morton Peto. An inscribed trowel in the Parliamentary Archives records that Emily, sister of Peto's daughter-in-law, was given the honour of laying the first stone.[15] It was Pugin's last design before his descent into mental illness and death in 1852, and Pugin himself wrote, at the time of Barry's last visit to him to collect the drawings: "I never worked so hard in my life for Mr Barry for tomorrow I render all my designs for finishing his bell tower and it is beautiful".[16]

Design

Completed in 1859, the tower is designed in Pugin's Gothic Revival style and is 316 feet (96.3 m) high, making it the third tallest clock tower in the UK. Its dials (at the centre) are 180 feet (54.9 m) above ground level. The tower's base is square, measuring 40 feet (12.2 m) on each side,[17] resting on concrete foundations 12 feet (3.7 m) thick.[18] It was constructed using bricks clad on the exterior with sand-coloured Anston limestone from South Yorkshire, topped by a spire covered in hundreds of cast iron rooftiles.[19] There is a spiral staircase with 290 stone steps up to the clock room, followed by 44 to reach the belfry, and an additional 59 to the top of the spire.[17]

Above the belfry and the Ayrton Light are 52 shields decorated with national emblems of the four countries of the UK: the red and white rose of England's Tudor dynasty, the thistle of Scotland, shamrock of Northern Ireland, and leek of Wales. They also feature the pomegranate of Catherine of Aragon, first wife of the Tudor king Henry VIII; the portcullis, symbolising both Houses of Parliament;[20] and fleurs-de-lis, a legacy from when English monarchs claimed to rule France.[21]

A ventilation shaft running from ground level up to the belfry, which measures 16 feet (4.9 m) by 8 feet (2.4 m), was designed by David Boswell Reid, known as "the grandfather of air-conditioning". It was intended to draw cool, fresh air into the Palace of Westminster; in practice this did not work and the shaft was repurposed as a chimney, until around 1914.[22] The 2017–2021 conservation works included the addition of a lift (or elevator) that was installed in the shaft.[23]

Its foundations rest on a layer of gravel, below which is London Clay.[18] Owing to this soft ground, the tower leans slightly to the north-west by roughly 230 mm (9.1 in) over 55 m height, giving an inclination of approximately 1⁄240. This includes a planned maximum of 22 mm increased tilt due to tunnelling for the Jubilee Line Extension.[24] In the 1990s, thousands of tons of concrete were pumped into the ground underneath the tower to stabilise it during construction of the Westminster section of the Jubilee line.[25] It leans by about 500 mm (20 in) at the finial. Experts believe the tower's lean will not be a problem for another 4,000 to 10,000 years.[26]

Ayrton Light

A new feature was added in 1873 by Acton Smee Ayrton, then First Commissioner of Works and Public Buildings. The Ayrton Light is a lantern sited above the belfry and is lit whenever the House of Commons sits after dark. It can be seen from across London. Originally, it shone towards Buckingham Palace so Queen Victoria could look out of a window and see when the Commons were at work.[27]

Prison Room

Inside the tower is an oak-panelled Prison Room, which can only be accessed from the House of Commons, not via the tower entrance. It was last used in 1880 when atheist Charles Bradlaugh, newly elected Member of Parliament for Northampton, was imprisoned by the Serjeant at Arms after he protested against swearing a religious oath of allegiance to Queen Victoria.[28] Officially, the Serjeant at Arms can still make arrests, as they have had the authority to do since 1415. The room, however, is currently occupied by the Petitions Committee, which oversees petitions submitted to Parliament.[29]

Name

Journalists during Queen Victoria's reign called it St Stephen's Tower. As members of Parliament originally sat at St Stephen's Hall, these journalists referred to anything related to the House of Commons as "news from St Stephens", a term that survives in Welsh-language political reporting as "San Steffan". The Palace does contain a feature called St Stephen's Tower, located above the public entrance.[30] On 2 June 2012, the House of Commons voted in support of a proposal to change the name from the Clock Tower to Elizabeth Tower in commemoration of Elizabeth II in her Diamond Jubilee year, since the large west tower known as Victoria Tower had been renamed in tribute to Queen Victoria on the occasion of her Diamond Jubilee.[31] On 26 June 2012, the House of Commons confirmed that the name change could go ahead.[32] David Cameron, then prime minister, officially announced the change of name on 12 September 2012.[33] The change was marked by a naming ceremony in which John Bercow, then Speaker of the House of Commons, unveiled a plaque attached to the tower on the adjoining Speaker's Green.[34]

Clock

Dials

Augustus Pugin drew inspiration from the clockmaker Benjamin Lewis Vulliamy when he designed the dials. Each is made of cast iron sections bolted together. The whole frame is 22.5 feet (6.9 m) in diameter making them the third largest in the UK. They each contain 324 pieces of opalescent glass.[35] Originally, the dials were backlit using gas lamps, at first only when Parliament was sitting, but they have routinely been illuminated from dusk until dawn since 1876. Electric bulbs were installed at the beginning of the 20th century.[36] The ornate surrounds of the dials are gilded. At the base of each dial is the Latin inscription DOMINE SALVAM FAC REGINAM NOSTRAM VICTORIAM PRIMAM, which means "O Lord, keep safe our Queen Victoria the First".[37] Unlike Roman numeral clock dials that show the "4" position as IIII, the Great Clock faces depict "4" as IV.[38] The clock's gun metal hour hands and copper minute hands are 8.75 feet (2.7 m) and 14 feet (4.3 m) long respectively.[39]

When completed, the dials and clock hands were Prussian blue, but were painted black in the 1930s to disguise the effects of air pollution. The original colour scheme was reinstated during the 2017–2021 conservation work. Analysis of the paint layers found that no fewer than six different colour schemes had been used over the past 160 years.[40] The Victorian glass was also removed and replaced with faithful reproductions made in Germany by glassmakers Glasfabrik Lamberts.[41]

Movement

The clock's movement is known for its reliability. The designers were the lawyer and amateur horologist Edmund Beckett Denison and George Airy, the Astronomer Royal. Construction was entrusted to clockmaker Edward John Dent; after his death in 1853, his stepson Frederick Dent completed the work in 1854.[42] As the tower was not completed until 1859, Denison had time to experiment before its installation in April that year: instead of using a deadbeat escapement and remontoire as originally designed, he invented a double three-legged gravity escapement, which provides the best separation between pendulum and clock mechanism, thus mitigating the effects of rain, wind and snow on the dials.[43] Denison never patented his design, and it quickly became the standard on all new high-quality tower clocks.[44]

On top of the pendulum is a small stack of pre-decimal penny coins; these are to adjust the time of the clock. Adding a coin has the effect of minutely lifting the position of the pendulum's centre of mass, reducing the effective length of the pendulum rod and hence increasing the rate at which the pendulum swings. Adding or removing a penny will change the clock's speed by 0.4 seconds per day.[45] Other coins have been placed on the pendulum as well; in 2009, three of the pennies were replaced with a £5 commemorative coin minted to celebrate the then-upcoming 2012 Summer Olympics.[46]

Big Ben keeps time to within a few seconds per week.[47] It is hand wound (taking about 1.5 hours) three times a week. The Keeper of the Clock is responsible for looking after the movement in addition to overseeing every aspect of maintenance around the Palace. A team of horologists are on call 24 hours a day to attend to the clock in the event of an emergency.[48]

On 10 May 1941, a German bombing raid damaged two of the clock's dials and sections of the tower's stepped roof and destroyed the House of Commons chamber. Architect Sir Giles Gilbert Scott designed a new five-floor block. Two floors are occupied by the current chamber, which was used for the first time on 26 October 1950. The clock ran accurately and chimed throughout the Blitz.[49]

Breakdowns and other incidents

Before 1878: The clock stopped for the first time in its history, "through a heavy fall of snow" on the hands of a clock face.[50][51]
21 August 1877 – January 1878: The clock was stopped for three weeks to allow the tower and mechanism to be cleaned and repaired. The old escape wheel was replaced.[50]

February 1900: The heavy build-up of snow on a clock face impeded the progress of the hour hand, causing the clock to stop for about eight hours.[52]
1916: For two years during World War I, the bells were silenced and the clock faces were not illuminated at night to avoid guiding attacking German Zeppelins.[53] The bells were restored at 11:00 a.m. on 11 November 1918 to mark the end of the war.[52]
29 December 1927: Snow build-up on a clock face stopped the clock.[54]
Winter 1928: Heavy snow stopped the clock for several hours.[52]
2 April 1934: The clock stopped from 7:16 a.m. to 1:15 p.m., when it was repaired.[55]
23 September 1936: A painter painting the inside of the clock room placed a ladder against a shaft driving the hands, stopping the clock from 8:47 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.[52]
1 September 1939: Although the bells continued to ring, the clock faces were not illuminated at night throughout World War II to avoid guiding bomber pilots during the Blitz.[53]
10/11 May 1941: the clock was damaged during a German bombing raid, either by a small bomb or by a British anti-aircraft shell. Stonework and ornamental ironwork were damaged, and the glass on the south dial was shattered.[52] The damage was repaired at the time, but in major refurbishment from 2017 it was found that the tower had sustained greater damage than originally thought, and asbestos, lead paint and broken glass were discovered, increasing the refurbishment cost from an estimated £29 million to nearly £80 million.[56]
3–4 June 1941: The clock stopped from 10:13 p.m. until 10:13 the following morning, after a workman repairing air-raid damage to the clock face left a hammer too close to the mechanism.[57][52]
9 December 1944: The clock hands stopped due to mechanical failure. The broken part‍— a pendulum suspension spring‍— was replaced within a few hours.[52]
25–26 January 1945: Extremely cold temperatures froze the rubber bushings on the quarter-bell hammers, preventing the chimes sounding from 9:00 p.m. on the 25th to 9:00 p.m. the following evening; the BBC broadcast the pips in the interval.[52]
28 January 1947: The rubber bushings on the quarter bell hammers again froze before the clock sounded midnight, muting the chimes, though the problem was resolved by the morning.[52]
12 August 1949: The clock slowed by four and a half minutes after a flock of starlings perched on the minute hand.[58][52]
13 January 1955: The clock stopped at 3:24 a.m. due to drifts of snow forming on the north and east dials. Small electric heaters were placed just inside these two dials, and this measure has helped to reduce instances of freezing in recent years.[52]
18 July 1955: The rope operating the striking hammer broke, silencing the clock from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.[52]
New Year's Eve 1962: The clock slowed due to heavy snow and ice on the hands, causing the pendulum to detach from the clockwork, as it is designed to do in such circumstances, to avoid serious damage elsewhere in the mechanism – the pendulum continuing to swing freely. Thus, it chimed-in the 1963 new year nine minutes late.[59]
30 January 1965: The bells were silenced during the funeral of statesman and former prime minister Winston Churchill.[60]
9 January 1968: Snow buildup on the clock faces blocked the hands from moving, stopping the clock from 6:28 a.m. to 10:10 a.m.[52]
5 August 1976: The air brake speed regulator of the chiming mechanism broke from torsional fatigue after more than 100 years of use, causing the fully wound 4-ton weight to spin the winding drum out of the movement, causing much damage. The clock was shut down for a total of 26 days over nine months – it was reactivated on 9 May 1977. This was the longest break in operation since its construction. During this time BBC Radio 4 broadcast the pips instead.[61] Although there were minor stoppages from 1977 to 2002, when maintenance of the clock was carried out by the old firm of clockmakers Thwaites & Reed, these were often repaired within the permitted two-hour downtime and not recorded as stoppages. Before 1970, maintenance was carried out by the original firm of Dents; since 2002, by parliamentary staff.
11 June 1984: Two members of the environmental group Greenpeace scaled the clocktower and blocked the clock face for 11 hours.[62]
March 1986 and January 1987: The problem of the rubber bushings on the quarter bell chimes freezing recurred, muffling the chimes.[52]
30 April 1997: The clock stopped 24 hours before the general election, and stopped again three weeks later.[63]

20 March 2004: Twenty years after their first scaling of the clocktower, Greenpeace activists blocked the clock face for seven hours.[64]
27 May 2005: The clock stopped at 10:07 p.m., possibly because of hot weather; temperatures in London had reached an unseasonable 31.8 °C (89.2 °F). It resumed, but stopped again at 10:20 p.m., and remained still for about 90 minutes before resuming.[63]
29 October 2005: The mechanism was stopped for about 33 hours to allow maintenance work on the clock and its chimes. It was the lengthiest maintenance shutdown in 22 years.[65]
7:00 a.m on 5 June 2006: The clock tower's "Quarter Bells" were taken out of commission for four weeks as a bearing holding one of the quarter bells was worn and needed to be removed for repairs.[66] During this period, BBC Radio 4 broadcast recordings of British bird song followed by the pips in place of the usual chimes.[67]
11 August 2007: Start of six-week stoppage for maintenance. Bearings in the clock's chime train and the "great bell" striker were replaced, for the first time since installation.[68] During the maintenance the clock was driven by an electric motor.[69] Once again, BBC Radio 4 broadcast the pips during this time. The intention was that the clock should run accurately for a further 200 years before major maintenance is again required; in fact the repairs sufficed for ten years.[70]
17 April 2013: The bells were silenced as a mark of "profound dignity and deep respect" during the funeral of former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.[71]
25 August 2015: Maintenance crews discovered the clock to be running seven seconds fast. They removed coins from its pendulum to correct the error, which caused it to run slow for a period.[72]
21 August 2017: Start of a four-year silencing of the chimes during maintenance and repair work to the clock mechanism, and repairs and improvements to the clock tower building. During this time, dials, hands, and lights were removed for restoration, with at least one dial – with its hands driven by an electric motor – left intact, functioning, and visible at any given time. A lift was also installed during this renovation.[73][74]
10 May 2023: The clock dials all stopped at 12:55 p.m., and Big Ben did not chime at 1:00 p.m. The hands restarted, but the clock was five minutes slow until rectified at 1:47 p.m.[56]
8 March 2025: At around 7:24am Daniel Day, 29, scaled the side of the Elizabeth Tower and sat on a ledge holding a Palestinian flag.[75] Day posted videos and photos of his climb to his Instagram account.[76] At midnight Day stepped onto a cherrypicker next to the Elizabeth Tower ending a 16 hour long protest.[77]

Bells

Big Ben (Great Bell)

The main bell, officially known as the "Great Bell" but better known as Big Ben, is the largest bell in the tower and part of the Great Clock of Westminster. It sounds an E-natural.[78]

The original bell was a 16-ton (16.3-tonne) hour bell, cast on 6 August 1856 in Stockton-on-Tees by John Warner & Sons.[4] It is thought that the bell was originally to be called "Victoria" or "Royal Victoria" in honour of Queen Victoria, but that an MP suggested the bell's current nickname of "Big Ben" during a Parliamentary debate; the comment is not recorded in Hansard.[79]

Since the tower was not yet finished, the bell was mounted in New Palace Yard but, during testing, it cracked beyond repair and a replacement had to be made. The bell was recast on 10 April 1858 at the Whitechapel Bell Foundry as a 13.5-ton (13.76-tonne) bell.[4][80] The second bell was transported from the foundry to the tower on a trolley drawn by sixteen horses, with crowds cheering its progress; it was then pulled 200 ft (61.0 m) up to the Clock Tower's belfry, a feat that took 18 hours. It is 7 feet 6 inches (2.29 m) tall and 9 feet (2.74 m) diameter. This new bell first chimed on 11 July 1859; in September it too cracked under the hammer. According to the foundry's manager, George Mears, the horologist Denison had used a hammer more than twice the maximum weight specified.[4] For three years Big Ben was taken out of commission and the hours were struck on the lowest of the quarter bells until it was repaired. To make the repair, a square piece of metal was chipped out from the rim around the crack, and the bell given an eighth of a turn so the new hammer struck in a different place.[4] Big Ben has chimed with a slightly different tone ever since, and is still in use today with the crack unrepaired. Big Ben was the largest bell in the British Isles until "Great Paul", a 16.75-ton (17 tonne) bell currently hung in St Paul's Cathedral, was cast in 1881.[81]

In August 2007, the bell's striker was replaced for the first time since installation.[68]

The origin of the nickname "Big Ben" has been the subject of some debate. The nickname was applied first to the Great Bell; and there is debate as to whether it was named after Sir Benjamin Hall, who as Minister for Public Works, oversaw the installation of the Great Bell, or after English heavyweight boxing champion Ben Caunt.[4][82][83] However, it is very clear from statements in the press at the time that the name derives from the nickname of Sir Benjamin Hall who was a tall man.[84][85][86][87][88][89] Now "Big Ben" is often used, by extension, to refer to the clock, the tower and the bell collectively, although the nickname is not universally accepted as referring to the clock and tower.[90] Some authors of works about the tower, clock and bell sidestep the issue by using the words Big Ben first in the title, then going on to clarify that the subject of the book is the clock and tower as well as the bell.[61][91]

Chimes

Along with the Great Bell, the belfry houses four quarter bells which play the Westminster Quarters on the quarter hours. The four quarter bells sound G♯, F♯, E, and B. They were cast by John Warner & Sons at their Crescent Foundry in 1857 (G♯, F♯ and B) and 1858 (E). The Foundry was in Jewin Crescent, in what is now known as the Barbican, in the City of London.[92] The bells are sounded by hammers pulled by cables coming from the link room—a low-ceiling space between the clock room and the belfry—where they are triggered by cables coming from the chime train.[19]

The quarter bells play a once-repeating, 20-note sequence of rounds and four changes in the key of E major: 1–4 at quarter past, 5–12 at half past, 13–20 and 1–4 at quarter to, and 5–20 on the hour (which sounds 25 seconds before the main bell tolls the hour). Because the low bell (B) is struck twice in quick succession, there is not enough time to pull a hammer back, and it is supplied with two wrench hammers on opposite sides of the bell. The tune is that of the Cambridge Chimes, first used for the chimes of Great St Mary's church, Cambridge, and supposedly a variation, attributed to William Crotch, based on violin phrases from the air "I know that my Redeemer liveth" in Handel's Messiah.[93][94] The notional words of the chime, again derived from Great St Mary's and in turn an allusion to Psalm 37:23–24, are: "All through this hour/Lord be my guide/And by Thy power/No foot shall slide".[95] They are written on a plaque on the wall of the clock room.[96]

One of the requirements for the clock was that the first stroke of the hour bell should be correct to within one second per day. The tolerance is with reference to Greenwich Mean Time (BST in summer).[97] So, at twelve o'clock, for example, it is the first of the twelve hour-bell strikes that signifies the hour (the New Year on New Year's Eve at midnight). The time signalled by the last of the "six pips" (UTC) may be fractionally different.

On 13 November 2022, Remembrance Sunday, the chimes of Big Ben returned to regular service for the first time since August 2017, preceding the hour bell being sounded at 11:00 a.m. local time, the first hour strike marking the beginning of two minutes of silence.[98]

Cultural significance

The clock has become a cultural symbol of the United Kingdom, particularly in the visual media. When a television or film-maker wishes to indicate a generic location in the country, a popular way to do so is to show an image of the tower, often with a red double-decker bus or black cab in the foreground.[99]

In 2008, a survey of 2,000 people found that the tower was the most popular landmark in the United Kingdom.[100] It has also been named as the most iconic film location in London.[101]

The sound of the clock chiming has also been used this way in audio media; the Westminster Quarters are imitated by other clocks and other devices, but the sound of Big Ben is preferred as the original and best. Big Ben is a focal point of New Year celebrations in the United Kingdom, with radio and television stations airing its chimes to welcome the start of the New Year. To welcome in 2012, the clock tower was lit with fireworks that exploded at every toll of Big Ben.[102] Similarly, on Remembrance Day, the chimes of Big Ben are broadcast to mark the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month and the start of the two minutes' silence.[103]

In 1999, prior to the millennium New Year, a recording of the clock was released by London Records under the title "Millennium Chimes", with the artist labelled as Big Ben. It reached number 53 for the week ending 8 January 2000 (which included purchases prior to 31 December 1999).[104][105]

The chimes of Big Ben have also been used at the state funerals of monarchs on four occasions, chiming one stroke for each year of the monarch's life: firstly, at the funeral of King Edward VII in 1910, (68 strokes); secondly, at the funeral of King George V in 1936 (70 strokes); thirdly, at the funeral of King George VI in 1952 (56 strokes);[106] and lastly, at the funeral of Queen Elizabeth II in 2022 (96 strokes).[107]

On some occasions, Londoners who live an appropriate distance from the tower and Big Ben can, by means of listening to the chimes both live and on analogue radio, hear the bell strike thirteen times. This is possible because the electronically transmitted chimes arrive virtually instantaneously, while the "live" sound is delayed travelling through the air since the speed of sound is relatively slow.[108]

ITN's News at Ten opening sequence formerly featured an image of the tower with the sound of Big Ben's chimes punctuating the announcement of the news headlines of the day.[109] The Big Ben chimes (known within ITN as "The Bongs") continue to be used during the headlines and all ITV News bulletins use a graphic based on the Westminster clock dial. Big Ben can also be heard striking the hour before some news bulletins on BBC Radio 4 (6 p.m. and midnight, plus 10 p.m. on Sundays) and the BBC World Service, a practice that began on 31 December 1923. The sound of the chimes is sent live from a microphone permanently installed in the tower and connected by line to Broadcasting House.[110]

At the close of the polls for the 2010 general election the results of the national exit poll were projected onto the south side of the tower.[111] On 27 July 2012, starting at 8:12 a.m, Big Ben chimed 30 times, to welcome the Games of the 30th Olympiad, which officially began that day, to London.[112]

2017–2021 restoration

On 21 August 2017, Big Ben's chimes fell silent for four years to allow essential restoration work to be carried out on the tower. The decision to silence the bells was made to protect the hearing of the workers on the tower, and drew much criticism from senior MPs and Prime Minister Theresa May.[113] The striking and tolling of the bells for important occasions, such as New Year's Eve and Remembrance Sunday, was handled via an electric motor; and at least one of the four clock faces always remained visible during the restoration. Scaffolding was put up around the tower immediately after the bells were silenced. The cost of the project to the taxpayers and creditors was originally estimated to be roughly £29 million (equivalent to £35.7 million in 2023),[114] but it more than doubled, to £69 million (equivalent to £77.6 million in 2023).[114][115]

In February 2020, the renovations revealed that the Elizabeth Tower had sustained greater damage than previously thought from the May 1941 bombing raid that destroyed the adjacent House of Commons. Other costly discoveries included asbestos in the belfry, the "extensive" use of lead paint, broken glass on the clock dials, and serious deterioration to the tower's intricate stone carvings due to air pollution. The cost of addressing these problems was estimated at £18.6 million (equivalent to £20.9 million in 2023),[114] bringing the total budget for restoring the Elizabeth Tower to nearly £80 million (equivalent to £90 million in 2023).[114][116]

The 2,567 cast-iron roof tiles were removed and refurbished, and a lift was installed to make access easier, along with a basic toilet facility with running water, for the first time in the tower itself. The Ayrton Light at the top of the tower, which is lit when Parliament is sitting, was also fully dismantled and restored along with the other lights in the Belfry, being replaced with low-energy LEDs.[117] One of the most visible changes to the tower has been the restoration of the clock-face framework to its original colour of Prussian blue, used when the tower was first built in 1859, with the black paint that was used to cover up the soot-stained dial frames having been stripped away. The clock faces were regilded, and the shields of St George repainted in their original red and white colours. The 1,296 pieces of glass that make up the clock faces have also been removed and replaced.[118][119]

In December 2021, after four years of renovations and restoration, the tower emerged from behind its scaffolding in time for the ringing in of the new year.[120] In April 2022, the gantry supporting the scaffolding was removed.[121]

See also

London portal
Big Ben Aden; a 22-metre replica built in 1890
Kolkata Time Zone Tower in Lake Town, Kolkata, India; a 30-metre replica built in 2015
Little Ben; a smaller 1892 clock tower near London Victoria station

References

^ Andersson, Jasmine (29 October 2022). "When do the clocks go back? Big Ben prepares for first change in five years". BBC News. Retrieved 30 October 2022.

^ "West Dial re-connected to the Great Clock". UK Parliament. 28 April 2022. Retrieved 30 October 2022.

^ Fowler, p. 95.

^ a b c d e f g "The Story of Big Ben". Whitechapel Bell Foundry. Archived from the original on 17 February 2018. Retrieved 4 May 2022.

^ "West Dial re-connected to the Great Clock". UK Parliament. 28 April 2022. Retrieved 30 October 2022.

^ Hartland, Nicole (15 March 2021). "Leek, Thistle, Shamrock and Rose: Symbols of the UK and the Elizabeth Tower". www.parliament.uk. Retrieved 25 October 2023.

^ Excell, Jon (5 July 2016). "Why is Big Ben falling silent?". BBC News.

^ "Palace of Westminster and Westminster Abbey including Saint Margaret's Church". UNESCO.

^ "Big Ben in films and popular culture". The Daily Telegraph. 8 November 2016. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022.

^ Centre, UNESCO World Heritage. "UNESCO World Heritage Centre - World Heritage List". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Retrieved 8 November 2022.

^ Fowler, Susanne (12 April 2021). "What Does It Take to Hear Big Ben Again? 500 Workers and a Hiding Place". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 April 2021.

^ "Big Ben 'bongs' to be silenced for £29m refurbishment". BBC News. 26 April 2016. Retrieved 26 April 2016.

^ "1289-1834: Big Ben and Elizabeth Tower". UK Parliament. Retrieved 9 July 2014.

^ McKay, p. 45.

^ McKay, p. 46.

^ Hill, p. 482.

^ a b McKay, p. 266.

^ a b McKay, p. 201.

^ a b McKay, pp. 47–48.

^ "Portcullis". UK Parliament. Retrieved 21 January 2021.

^ "Elizabeth Tower decorative shields: before and during the conservation". UK Parliament. Retrieved 21 January 2021.

^ McKay, p. 44.

^ "Big Ben: Lifts". UK Parliament. 9 December 2020.

^ "Tunnel Vision" (PDF). Post Report Summary. Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology. January 1997. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 November 2006.

^ McKay, p. 25.

^ "Clock ticking for leaning Big Ben". BBC News. 11 October 2011.

^ McKay, p.28.

^ McKay, p. 7.

^ "The Prison Room of Elizabeth Tower". Parliamentary Archives. 28 May 2020.

^ "Frequently asked questions: Big Ben and Elizabeth Tower". UK Parliament.

^ Hough, Andrew (2 June 2012). "The Queen's Diamond Jubilee: 'Big Ben to be renamed Elizabeth Tower'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2014.

^ Rath, Kayte (26 June 2012). "Big Ben's tower renamed Elizabeth Tower in honour of Queen". BBC News.

^ "Questions to the Prime Minister". House of Commons Hansard Debates for 12 Sept 2012. Hansard. Retrieved 13 September 2012.

^ "Elizabeth Tower naming ceremony". U K Parliament. 12 September 2012. Retrieved 30 April 2016.

^ "Great Clock facts". UK Parliament. Retrieved 30 January 2021.

^ McKay, pp. 121–129.

^ McKay, p. 11.

^ Good, P. 81.

^ McKay, pp. 266-267.

^ "Turning Big Ben's clock dials blue". UK Parliament. Retrieved 31 December 2020.

^ "New glass for Big Ben". Dachser. 20 February 2020.

^ "Denison, Dent and delays". Building the Great Clock. London: UK Parliament. 13 November 2009. Archived from the original on 4 December 2009. Retrieved 23 November 2009.

^ McKay, p. 13.

^ McKay, p. 4.

^ "Great Clock facts". Big Ben. London: UK Parliament. 13 November 2009. Archived from the original on 7 October 2009. Retrieved 23 November 2009.

^ "150-year old pennies removed from London's Big Ben". Reuters.

^ McKay, p. 130.

^ McKay p. 5.

^ Jardine, Cassandra (29 May 2009). "Let's hear it again from Big Ben". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022.

^ a b "Big Ben". The Herald (Melbourne). Melbourne. 5 January 1878. p. 3. Retrieved 2 April 2019.

^ "Big Ben". The Kyneton Observer. 10 January 1878. p. 2. Retrieved 2 April 2019.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n MacDonald, Peter (13 October 2005). Big Ben: The Bell, the Clock and the Tower. The History Press. ISBN 978-0-7524-9549-1. Retrieved 18 June 2017.

^ a b "Bong! Big Ben rings in its 150th anniversary". NBC News. Associated Press. 29 May 2009. Retrieved 1 June 2009.

^ "Snow Stops Big Ben". The Labor Daily. Sydney. 30 December 1927. p. 1. Retrieved 2 April 2019.

^ "Big Ben Stops on Holiday". The News. Adelaide. 3 April 1934. p. 10. Retrieved 2 April 2019.

^ a b Grierson, Jamie (10 May 2023). "Time stands still at Westminster as Big Ben fails to chime". The Guardian.

^ "Big Ben stopped by hammer". The Morning Bulletin. Rockhampton. 6 June 1941. Retrieved 11 May 2014.

^ "Big Ben's big clean". BBC News. 21 August 2001.

^ Plester, Jeremy (9 November 2016). "Bell tolls for Big Ben: snow, ice and sunflower effect stop the clock". The Guardian. London.

^ "Big Ben to be silent for Baroness Thatcher's funeral". BBC News. 15 April 2013. Retrieved 7 February 2014.

^ a b Macdonald, Peter G (25 January 2005). Big Ben: The Bell, The Clock And The Tower. Stroud, Gloucestershire: The History Press. ISBN 978-0-7524-9549-1.

^ "Peace protesters scale Big Ben". UPI. 11 June 1984. Retrieved 30 October 2024.

^ a b "Big Ben chimes stoppage mystery". BBC News. 28 May 2005. Retrieved 26 April 2010.

^ Goodchild, Sophie (21 March 2004). "Greenpeace brothers climb Big Ben tower and spark security review". The Independent. Retrieved 30 October 2024.

^ "In pictures: Big Ben's big turn off". BBC News. 29 October 2005. Retrieved 26 April 2010.

^ "Bong! A change of tune at Westminster". The Independent. 4 June 2006. Retrieved 8 June 2022.

^ Rippon, Peter (12 June 2006). "The Editors: Bongs and Birds". BBC News. Retrieved 10 April 2017.

^ a b "Big Ben silenced for repair work". BBC News. 11 August 2007. Retrieved 26 April 2010.

^ "Big Ben 1859 – 2009 – Keeping the Great Clock ticking". UK Parliament. Archived from the original on 3 June 2009. Retrieved 27 May 2009.

^ Brand, Stewart (2008). The Clock of the Long Now. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-7867-2292-1.

^ Watt, Nicholas (15 April 2013). "Margaret Thatcher funeral: Big Ben to be silenced as mark of respect". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 17 May 2013.

^ Phipps, Claire (25 August 2015). "Clockwatchers ticked off as Big Ben's chimes run seven seconds fast". The Guardian. Retrieved 30 August 2015.

^ "Big Ben's bongs to fall silent until 2021 for repairs". BBC News. London. 14 August 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2021.

^ "Big Ben to be silenced for four years for maintenance". The Guardian. 14 August 2017. Retrieved 8 January 2021.

^ "Negotiators appeal to man to come down from Big Ben clock tower". Sky News. Retrieved 8 March 2025.

^ "Instagram". www.instagram.com. Retrieved 8 March 2025.

^ "Man holding Palestinian flag who climbed up Elizabeth Tower comes down". Sky News. Retrieved 9 March 2025.

^ "Facts and figures". www.parliament.uk. Retrieved 23 November 2021.

^ "Big Ben – How did Big Ben get its Name?". Icons of England. Archived from the original on 24 January 2010. Retrieved 30 April 2016.

^ The actual weight quoted by the founders is 13  tons 10 cwts 3 qtrs 15 lbs.

^ "The History of Great Paul". Bell foundry museum, Leicester. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 19 October 2008.

^ "The Great Bell – Big Ben". UK Parliament. Retrieved 9 July 2014.

^ "The Great Bell – Big Ben". Living Heritage. UK Parliament. 13 November 2009. Retrieved 28 July 2012.

^ FindMyPast: Evening Mail, 22 Oct 1856, p7, col4, "Big Ben of Westminster" https://www.findmypast.com/image-viewer?issue=BL%2F0001316%2F18561022&page=7&article=039&stringtohighlight=benjamin+hall+big+ben

^ FindMyPast: The Illustrated London News, 1 November 1856, p444, col1, "Removal of the Bell for the Great Clock" https://www.findmypast.com/image-viewer?issue=BL%2F0001578%2F18561101&page=6&article=020&stringtohighlight=benjamin+hall+big+ben

^ FindMyPast: The Morning Herald, 14 November 1856, p6, col3, "Big Ben of Westminster: https://www.findmypast.com/image-viewer?issue=BL%2F0002408%2F18561114&page=6&article=076&stringtohighlight=benjamin+hall+big+ben

^ FindMyPast: The Western Flying Post: 25 November 1856, p4, col3, "Metrop[olitan and Provincial" https://www.findmypast.com/image-viewer?issue=BL%2F0000411%2F18561125&page=4&article=028&stringtohighlight=benjamin+hall+big+ben

^ FindMyPast: The Morning Herald, 2 February 1858, p4, col 5 https://www.findmypast.com/image-viewer?issue=BL%2F0002408%2F18580202&page=4&article=067&stringtohighlight=benjamin+hall+big+ben

^ FindMyPast: Saint James Chronicle, 8 March 1859, p7, col3, "The Great Westminster Clock" https://www.findmypast.com/image-viewer?issue=BL%2F0002193%2F18590308&page=7&article=056&stringtohighlight=benjamin+hall+big+ben

^ Betts, Jonathan D. (26 November 2008). "Big Ben". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Archived from the original on 2 November 2008. Retrieved 27 October 2008.

^ Lockhart, Ann (1997). Big Ben and the Westminster Clock Tower. Andover, Hampshire: Pitkin Guides. ISBN 978-0-85372-839-9.

^ "The New Houses of Parliament". The Standard. London. 16 November 1855. p. 2.

^ Phillips, Alan (1959). The Story of Big Ben. Her Majesty's Stationery Office. p. 13.

^ Starmer, William Wooding (1910). Quarter Chimes and Chime Tunes. London: Novello. pp. 6–8.

^ Lockyer, p. 149.

^ Milmo, Cahel (5 June 2006). "Bong! A change of tune at Westminster". The Independent. London. Retrieved 8 April 2008.

^ "The Story of Big Ben". Whitechapel Bell Foundry. Retrieved 9 July 2014.

^ "Big Ben to resume striking on Remembrance Sunday 2022". UK Parliament. 13 November 2022.

^ Patterson, John (1 June 2007). "City Light". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 18 June 2008. Retrieved 26 December 2016.

^ "Big Ben 'UK's favourite landmark'". BBC News. 9 April 2008. Retrieved 26 April 2010.

^ "Big Ben most iconic London film location". Metro. London. 21 October 2007. Retrieved 30 April 2016.

^ "Fireworks going off at the London Eye and Big Ben to welcome 2012 in London". BBC One. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 31 December 2011.

^ "Remembrance Day across the UK". BBC News. 14 November 2004. Retrieved 13 August 2012.

^ NME (12 September 2005). "Big Ben : Millennium chimes". NME. Retrieved 24 December 2023.

^ "MILLENNIUM CHIMES – BIG BEN". Official Charts. Retrieved 24 December 2023.

^ Hibbert & Weinreb, pp. 66–68.

^ "Big Ben tolled every minute for 96 minutes — once for every year of Queen Elizabeth II's life". www.cbsnews.com. 19 September 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2022.

^ How To Make Big Ben Strike Thirteen? - Secrets of the Universe - BBC Three. 1 November 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2024 – via YouTube.

^ Robinson, James (22 October 2009). "ITV to drop Big Ben from News at Ten titles". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 13 August 2012.

^ "Big Ben Microphone". BBC. Retrieved 15 April 2015.

^ "General election results beamed onto Big Ben". UK Parliament. Archived from the original on 11 November 2010. Retrieved 30 April 2016.

^ "Big Ben rings in Olympic Morning". ITV News. 27 July 2012. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 10 April 2018 – via YouTube.

^ Hughes, Laura (16 August 2017). "Theresa May says 'it can't be right for Big Ben to be silent for four years'". The Daily Telegraph. London. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 12 July 2019.

^ a b c d United Kingdom Gross Domestic Product deflator figures follow the MeasuringWorth "consistent series" supplied in Thomas, Ryland; Williamson, Samuel H. (2024). "What Was the U.K. GDP Then?". MeasuringWorth. Retrieved 15 July 2024.

^ "Big Ben tower repair costs double". BBC News. 29 September 2017. Retrieved 12 July 2019.

^ Syal, Rajeev (13 February 2020). "Wartime bomb damage and asbestos inflates Big Ben repair bill to £80m". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 13 February 2020.

^ "Big Ben to be silenced for £29m refit". BBC News. 26 April 2016. Retrieved 12 July 2019.

^ Rosehill, Harry (21 March 2019). "Big Ben Has Been Repainted Blue". Londonist. Retrieved 12 July 2019.

^ "Elizabeth Tower contract awarded – News from Parliament". UK Parliament. 29 September 2017. Retrieved 5 September 2020.

^ Sandle, Paul; Marks, Lucy (23 November 2021). "London's Big Ben to show fresh face to ring in New Year". Reuters. Retrieved 26 November 2021.

^ "Elizabeth Tower now free of scaffolding". UK Parliament. Retrieved 1 June 2022.

Bibliography

Fowler, H. W. (1976). The Concise Oxford dictionary of current English (6th ed.). Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-861121-9.
Good, Richard (1996). Victorian Clocks. British Museum Press. ISBN 978-0-7141-0578-9.
Hill, Rosemary (2009). God's Architect: Pugin & the Building of Romantic Britain. Yale University Press. ASIN B008W30TJO.
Lockyer, Herbert (1993). A Devotional Commentary on Psalms. Kregel Christian Books. ISBN 978-0-8254-9742-1.
McKay, Chris (2010). Big Ben: the Great Clock and the Bells at the Palace of Westminster. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-958569-4.
Weinreb, Ben; Hibbert, Christopher (2011). "Big Ben". The London Encyclopaedia (3rd ed.). Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-2307-3878-2. Retrieved 27 October 2023.

External links

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsTravel information from WikivoyageData from Wikidata

Official website  at UK Parliament
The Palace of Westminster at UK Parliament
Big Ben's Clapper at Houghton-le-Spring Heritage Society
Interior photos of  the tower at UK Parliament's Flickr
"A tale of Two Towers: Big Ben and Pisa"—transcript of a lecture by John Burland (archived 12 October 2007)

Videos

What's inside Big Ben? (Elizabeth Tower) Comprehensive 2022 YouTube animation that shows clock's workings
Inside Big Ben's Makeover short 2020 film by the B1M
The Mechanical Genius of Big Ben (2017) documentary by Discovery
Big Ben's a Hundred (1959) newsreel by British Pathé
Big Ben's Clean Up (1955) by British Pathé
Big Ben: Inside London's Famous Clock (1950) by British Pathé

vte

Bell
Bell-cot
Bellfounding
Bell-gable
Bell pattern
Bell tower / Campanile
Bell-ringer
Bell shrine
Belfry
Bourdon
Campanology (index)
Peal
Ring of bells
Strike tone
Striking clock
Zvonnitsa

Agogô
Altar bell
Aluphone
Babendil
Bell tree
Bianzhong
Bicycle bell
Bonshō
Call bell
Cat bell
Church bell
Cowbell
Crotal bell
Dead bell
Doorbell
Dōtaku
Ghanta
Handbell
Jingle bell
Kane
Mini-ring
Ship's bell
Servant bell
Standing bell
Suzu
Tintinnabulum
Tubular bells

Chiming
Carillon
Chime
Canpanò
Ellacombe apparatus
Russian Orthodox bell ringing
Blagovest
Full circle ringing
Change ringing
Call changes
Method ringing
Bolognese bell ringing
Veronese bell ringing

Carillon
Chime
Canpanò
Ellacombe apparatus
Russian Orthodox bell ringing
Blagovest

Blagovest

Change ringing
Call changes
Method ringing
Bolognese bell ringing
Veronese bell ringing

Call changes
Method ringing

List of heaviest bells
Balangiga bells
Bell of Good Luck
Bell of King Seongdeok
Big Ben
Freedom Bell
Great Bell of Dhammazedi
Great Tom
Ivan the Great Bell Tower
Japanese Peace Bell
Justice Bell
Liberty Bell
Maria Gloriosa
Mingun Bell
Bells of Notre-Dame de Paris
Olympic Bell
Petersglocke
Sigismund Bell
Swan Bells
Temple Bell (Boston)
Tsar Bell
World Peace Bells
Kentucky
Yongle Big Bell

Kentucky

Bergholtz [sv]
Bilbie family
Andrey Chokhov
Cockey
Royal Eijsbouts
Kashpir Ganusov
Vanden Gheyn
Gillett & Johnston
Grassmayr
Miles Graye
Hatch
Pieter and François Hemony
Christopher Hodson
Franciscus Illenfeld
Juutila
Marinelli
McShane
Meneely
John Murphy
Olsen Nauen
Glockengießerei Otto
Paccard
Petit & Fritsen
Richard Phelps
Rudhall
John and William Rufford
Saarlouiser Glockengießerei
Schilling [de]
Taylor
Hugh Watts
Warner
Whitechapel
Geert van Wou

Dove's Guide for Church Bell Ringers
Glockenmuseum Stiftskirche Herrenberg
Liberty Bell Memorial Museum
Liberty Bell Museum
National Bell Festival
Ringing organizations
Freedom Bell, American Legion
All the Bells

vte

Albert Bridge
Battersea Bridge
Blackfriars Bridge
Chelsea Bridge
Hammersmith Bridge
Hungerford Bridge and Golden Jubilee Bridges
Lambeth Bridge
London Bridge
Millennium Bridge
Putney Bridge
Richmond Bridge
Southwark Bridge
Tower Bridge
Vauxhall Bridge
Waterloo Bridge
Westminster Bridge

BFI IMAX
Empire, Leicester Square
Odeon Luxe Leicester Square

Wembley Stadium (national stadium)
Brentford Community Stadium (Brentford)
Brisbane Road (Leyton Orient)
Craven Cottage (Fulham)
The Den (Millwall)
Emirates Stadium (Arsenal)
Loftus Road (Queens Park Rangers)
London Stadium (West Ham United)
Plough Lane (AFC Wimbledon)
Selhurst Park (Crystal Palace)
Stamford Bridge (Chelsea)
The Valley (Charlton Athletic)
Tottenham Hotspur Stadium (Tottenham Hotspur)

All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club
The Championship Course (rowing)
Crystal Palace National Sports Centre
Lord's (cricket)
Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park
The Oval (cricket)
Twickenham Stadium (rugby)

Adelphi
Apollo Victoria
Coliseum
Criterion
Dominion
Lyceum
Old Vic
Palladium
Royal National Theatre
Royal Opera House
Shakespeare's Globe
Theatre Royal, Drury Lane
Theatre Royal Haymarket
Vaudeville

Alexandra Palace
Brixton Academy
ExCeL
Hammersmith Apollo
The O2 Arena
Royal Albert Hall
Royal Festival Hall
Wembley Arena

10 Downing Street
Admiralty Arch
Bank of England
City Hall (Southwark)
City Hall (Newham)
County Hall
Guildhall
Horse Guards
Mansion House
The National Archives
Old Bailey
Palace of Westminster
Royal Courts of Justice
Scotland Yard
SIS Building
Thames House

British Museum
Churchill War Rooms
Courtauld Gallery
Cutty Sark
Golden Hinde
Guildhall Art Gallery
HMS Belfast
Imperial War Museum
London Canal Museum
London Museum
London Museum Docklands
London Museum of Water & Steam
Madame Tussauds
National Gallery
National Maritime Museum
National Portrait Gallery
Natural History Museum
Royal Academy of Arts
Royal Observatory
Science Museum
Tate Britain
Tate Modern
Tower of London
Victoria and Albert Museum
Wallace Collection
Young V&A

All Hallows-by-the-Tower
BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir
Bevis Marks Synagogue
Methodist Central Hall
Regent's Park Mosque
St Clement Danes
St Margaret's, Westminster
St Martin-in-the-Fields
St Mary-le-Bow
St Paul's Cathedral
Southwark Cathedral
Westminster Abbey
Westminster Cathedral

Fortnum & Mason
Hamleys
Harrods
Harvey Nichols
Hatchards
Liberty
Peter Jones
Selfridges

Borough Market
Brent Cross
Burlington Arcade
Camden Market
Kensington Arcade
Leadenhall Market
One New Change
Petticoat Lane Market
Royal Exchange
Westfield London
Westfield Stratford City

Buckingham Palace
Clarence House
Kensington Palace
St James's Palace

Banqueting House
Hampton Court Palace
Kew Palace
The Queen's Gallery
Royal Mews, Buckingham Palace

One Canada Square
One Churchill Place
8 Canada Square
20 Fenchurch Street
122 Leadenhall Street
Broadgate Tower
Citigroup Centre (London)
The Gherkin
Heron Tower
The Shard
St George Wharf Tower
Tower 42

Albert Memorial
ArcelorMittal Orbit
Big Ben
The Cenotaph
Cleopatra's Needle
Crystal Palace transmitting station
London Eye
London Wall
Marble Arch
Monument to the Great Fire of London
Nelson's Column
Shaftesbury Memorial Fountain ("Eros")
Thames Barrier
Wellington Arch

City Airport
Heathrow Airport
Blackfriars station
Cannon Street station
Charing Cross station
Clapham Junction station
Euston station
Fenchurch Street station
King's Cross station
Liverpool Street station
London Bridge station
Paddington station
St Pancras station
Stratford station
Victoria station
Waterloo station
London Cable Car
Victoria Coach Station

Barbican Estate
Battersea Power Station
British Library
BT Tower
Kew Gardens
Lambeth Palace
Lloyd's building
London Zoo
Oxo Tower
Smithfield Market
Somerset House
St Bartholomew's Hospital

Bushy Park
Green Park
Greenwich Park
Hampton Court Park
Hyde Park
Kensington Gardens
Regent's Park
Richmond Park
St James's Park

Battersea Park
Burgess Park
Clapham Common
College Green
Epping Forest
Finsbury Park
Gunnersbury Park
Hampstead Heath
Holland Park
Kew Gardens
Mitcham Common
Osterley Park
Trent Park
Victoria Park
Wandsworth Common
Wimbledon Common

Covent Garden
Horse Guards Parade
Leicester Square
Parliament Square
Piccadilly Circus
Sloane Square
Trafalgar Square

Aldwych
Baker Street
Bishopsgate
Bond Street
Carnaby Street
Charing Cross Road
Cheapside
Cornhill
Denmark Street
Fenchurch Street
Fleet Street
Haymarket
Jermyn Street
Kensington High Street
King's Road
Lombard Street
The Mall
Myrtle Avenue, Hounslow
Oxford Street
Park Lane
Piccadilly
Portobello Road
Regent Street
Shaftesbury Avenue
Sloane Street
Strand
Tottenham Court Road
Victoria Embankment
Whitehall

FAST

GermanyUnited StatesIsrael

