The Catcher in the Rye is a novel by American author J. D. Salinger that was partially published in serial form in 1945–46 before being novelized in 1951. Originally intended for adults, it is often read by adolescents for its themes of angst and alienation, and as a critique of superficiality in society.[4][5] The novel also deals with themes of innocence, identity, belonging, loss, connection, sex, and depression. The main character, Holden Caulfield, has become an icon for teenage rebellion.[6] Caulfield, nearly of age, gives his opinion on a wide variety of topics as he narrates his recent life events.

The Catcher in the Rye has been translated widely.[7] About one million copies are sold each year, with total sales of more than 65 million books.[8] The novel was included on Time's 2005 list of the 100 best English-language novels written since 1923,[9] and it was named by Modern Library and its readers as one of the 100 best English-language novels of the 20th century.[10][11][12] In 2003, it was listed at number 15 on the BBC's survey "The Big Read".

Plot

Holden Caulfield recalls the events of a long weekend, shortly before the previous year's Christmas. The story begins at Pencey Preparatory Academy, an elite boarding school in the fictional town of Agerstown, Pennsylvania, where he has been expelled after failing all his classes, except English.

Later, Holden agrees to write an English composition for his roommate, Ward Stradlater, who is heading out on a date. He is distressed when he learns that Stradlater's date is Jane Gallagher, with whom Holden has been infatuated. When Stradlater returns, hours later, he fails to appreciate the deeply personal composition Holden has written for him about the baseball glove of Holden's late brother, Allie, who died from leukemia years earlier, and refuses to say whether he had sex with Jane. Enraged, Holden punches and insults him, but Stradlater easily wins the fight. Fed up with the "phonies" at Pencey Prep, Holden decides to catch a train to New York, planning to stay away from his home until Wednesday, when his parents will have received notification of his expulsion.

Throughout the night, Holden has unpleasant encounters with a prostitute named Sunny, and her pimp, Maurice, who ends up in a physical altercation with Holden; a familiar date, Sally Hayes, who Holden invites to run away with him but is rejected; and an old classmate Carl Luce, who Holden unrelentingly questions about his sex life. Holden eventually gets drunk, awkwardly flirts with several adults, calls Sally again, and runs out of money.

Nostalgic to see his younger sister Phoebe, Holden sneaks into his parents' apartment while they are out and wakes her. Though happy to see him, Phoebe quickly guesses he has been expelled and chastises him for his general aimlessness and disdain. When she asks if he cares about anything, Holden shares a fantasy (based on a mishearing of Robert Burns's Comin' Through the Rye), in which he imagines himself saving children running through a field of rye by catching them before they fall off a nearby cliff. Phoebe points out that the actual poem says, "when a body meet a body, comin' through the rye." Holden breaks down in tears, and his sister tries to console him.

As his parents return home, he slips out and visits his former English teacher, Mr. Antolini, who expresses concern that Holden is headed for "a terrible fall". Mr. Antolini advises him to begin applying himself and provides him with a place to sleep. Holden awakens to find Mr. Antolini patting his head, which he interprets as a sexual advance. He leaves and spends the rest of the night in a train-waiting room at Grand Central Terminal, sinking deeper into despair.

In the morning, having lost hope of ever finding meaningful connection in the city, he decides to head out West to live as a deaf-mute gas station attendant in a log cabin. He arranges to see Phoebe at lunchtime to explain his plan and say goodbye. When they meet up at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, she arrives with a suitcase and asks to go with him. Holden refuses, which upsets Phoebe. He tries to cheer her by allowing her to skip school at the Central Park Zoo, but she remains angry. They eventually reach the carousel, where they reconcile after he buys her a ticket. The sight of her riding the carousel fills him with happiness.

He alludes to encountering his parents that night, "getting sick," and being sent to a sanatorium in California near his older brother, D. B. He also mentions that he will be attending another academy in September. The novel ends with Holden stating that he is reluctant to say more because talk of school has made him miss his former classmates.

History

Various older stories by Salinger contain characters similar to those in The Catcher in the Rye. While at Columbia University, Salinger wrote a short story called "The Young Folks" in Whit Burnett's class; one character from this story has been described as a "thinly penciled prototype of Sally Hayes". In November 1941 he sold the story "Slight Rebellion off Madison", which featured Holden Caulfield, to The New Yorker, but it was not published until December 21, 1946, due to World War II. The story "I'm Crazy", which was published in the December 22, 1945 issue of Collier's, contained material that was later used in The Catcher in the Rye. In 1946, The New Yorker accepted a 90-page manuscript about Holden Caulfield for publication, but Salinger later withdrew it.[13] The school Holden attends is Pencey Preparatory Academy, a boarding school in Pennsylvania that Salinger may have based on the Valley Forge Military Academy and College.[14]

Writing style

The Catcher in the Rye is narrated in a subjective style from the point of view of Holden Caulfield, following his exact thought processes. There is flow in the seemingly disjointed ideas and episodes; for example, as Holden sits in a chair in his dorm, minor events, such as picking up a book or looking at a table, unfold into discussions about experiences.

Critical reviews affirm that the novel accurately reflected the teenage colloquial speech of the time.[15] Words and phrases that appear frequently include:[16]

"Flitty" – homosexual
"Give her the time" – sexual intercourse
"Necking" – kissing, hugging, and caressing passionately
"Phony" – people who are dishonest or fake about who they really are[17]
"Prince" – a fine, generous, helpful fellow (often used in sarcastic fashion)
"Rubbernecks" – people who turn their heads to gaze in curiosity
"To shoot the bull" – To make small talk to pass the time
"Snowing" – deceiving, misleading, or winning over by glib talk, flattery, etc.

Interpretations

Bruce Brooks held that Holden's attitude remains unchanged at story's end, implying no maturation, thus differentiating the novel from young adult fiction.[18]
In contrast, Louis Menand thought that teachers assign the novel because of the optimistic ending, to teach adolescent readers that "alienation is just a phase."[19] While Brooks maintained that Holden acts his age, Menand claimed that Holden thinks as an adult, given his ability to accurately perceive people and their motives. Others highlight the dilemma of Holden's state, in between adolescence and adulthood.[20][21] Holden is quick to become emotional. "I felt sorry as hell for..." is a phrase he often uses. It is often said that Holden changes at the end, when he watches Phoebe on the carousel, and he talks about the golden ring and how it's good for kids to try to grab it.[20]

Peter Beidler in his A Reader's Companion to J. D. Salinger's "The Catcher in the Rye" identified the movie that the prostitute "Sunny" refers to. In chapter 13 she says that in the movie a boy who looked like Holden fell off a boat, and from this detail, Beidler deduced that the movie was Captains Courageous (1937), with the boy played by child-actor Freddie Bartholomew.[22]

Each Caulfield child has literary talent. D. B. writes screenplays in Hollywood;[23] Holden also reveres D. B. for his writing skill (Holden's own best subject), but he also despises Hollywood industry-based movies, considering them the ultimate in "phony" as the writer has no space for his own imagination and describes D. B.'s move to Hollywood to write for films as "prostituting himself"; Allie wrote poetry on his baseball glove;[24] and Phoebe is a diarist.[25]
This "catcher in the rye" is an analogy for Holden, who admires in children attributes that he often struggles to find in adults, like innocence, kindness, spontaneity, and generosity. Falling off the cliff could be a progression into the adult world that surrounds him and that he strongly criticizes. Later, Phoebe and Holden exchange roles as the "catcher" and the "fallen"; he gives her his hunting hat, the catcher's symbol, and becomes the fallen as Phoebe becomes the catcher.[26]

In their biography of Salinger, David Shields and Shane Salerno argue that: "The Catcher in the Rye can best be understood as a disguised war novel." Salinger witnessed the horrors of World War II, but rather than writing a combat novel, Salinger, according to Shields and Salerno, "took the trauma of war and embedded it within what looked to the naked eye like a coming-of-age novel."[27]

In his book Rebels: Youth and the Cold War Origins of Identity, [28] Professor Leerom Medovoi posits that The Catcher in the Rye’s story is centered on identity, and that Holden Caulfield “epitomizes the triumph of the young rebel as a requisite figure for representing the national identity of America.” [28] Medovoi says that in contrast to the oppressive governance of the 1950s Soviet Union, America thought itself a plucky and rebellious player on the world stage, similar to how Holden felt in contrast with the phony adult world. Like many teens today, Holden struggles to find a balance between the adult world and the world of childhood. His desire to be “the catcher in the rye,” preventing children from falling into the symbolic death that is maturity, reflects his own fear of growing up.

Reception

The Catcher in the Rye has been consistently listed as one of the best novels of the twentieth century. Shortly after its publication, in an article for The New York Times, Nash K. Burger called it "an unusually brilliant novel,"[3] while James Stern wrote an admiring review of the book in a voice imitating Holden's.[29] George H. W. Bush called it a "marvelous book," listing it among the books that inspired him.[30] In June 2009, the BBC's Finlo Rohrer wrote that, 58 years since publication, the book is still regarded "as the defining work on what it is like to be a teenager."[31] Out of all teen demographics over the years, troubled and depressed teens seem to have a greater tendency to relate with Holden. In a 1975 interview with Robert Coles, [32]renowned child psychoanalyst Anne Freud shares her experience treating teens who read The Catcher in the Rye for school. “I got to know this Holden Caulfield by hearsay before I met him as a reader. My analytic patients spoke of him sometimes as if they’d actually met him; they used his words, his way of speaking. [...] I began to realize that they had taken him into their minds, and hugged him – they spoke, now, not only his words in the book (quotations from it) but his words become their own words.”[32] Adam Gopnik considers it one of the "three perfect books" in American literature, along with Adventures of Huckleberry Finn and The Great Gatsby, and believes that "no book has ever captured a city better than Catcher in the Rye captured New York in the fifties."[33] In an appraisal of The Catcher in the Rye written after the death of J. D. Salinger, Jeff Pruchnic says the novel has retained its appeal for many generations. Pruchnic describes Holden as a "teenage protagonist frozen midcentury but destined to be discovered by those of a similar age in every generation to come."[34] Bill Gates said that The Catcher in the Rye is one of his favorite books,[35] as has Aaron Sorkin.[36]

Not all reception has been positive. The book has had its share of naysayers, including the longtime Washington Post book critic Jonathan Yardley, who, in 2004, wrote that the experience of rereading the novel after several decades proved to be "a painful experience: The combination of Salinger's execrable prose and Caulfield's jejune narcissism produced effects comparable to mainlining castor oil." Yardley described the novel as among the worst popular books in the annals of American literature. "Why," Yardley asked, "do English teachers, whose responsibility is to teach good writing, repeatedly and reflexively require students to read a book as badly written as this one?"[37] According to Rohrer, many contemporary readers, as Yardley found, "just cannot understand what the fuss is about.... many of these readers are disappointed that the novel fails to meet the expectations generated by the mystique it is shrouded in. J. D. Salinger has done his part to enhance this mystique. That is to say, he has done nothing."[31] Rohrer assessed the reasons behind both the popularity and criticism of the book, saying that it "captures existential teenage angst" and has a "complex central character" and "accessible conversational style"; while at the same time some readers may dislike the "use of 1940s New York vernacular" and the excessive "whining" of the "self-obsessed character".

Censorship in the United States

In 1960, a teacher in Tulsa, Oklahoma, was fired for assigning the novel in class. She was later reinstated.[38] Between 1961 and 1982, The Catcher in the Rye was the most censored book in high schools and libraries in the United States.[39] The book was briefly banned in the Issaquah, Washington, high schools in 1978 when three members of the School Board alleged the book was part of an "overall communist plot".[40] This ban did not last long, and the offending board members were immediately recalled and removed in a special election.[41] In 1981, it was both the most censored book and the second most taught book in public schools in the United States.[42] According to the American Library Association, The Catcher in the Rye was the 10th most frequently challenged book from 1990 to 1999.[10] It was one of the ten most challenged books of 2005,[43] and although it had been off the list for three years, it reappeared in the list of most challenged books of 2009.[44]

The challenges generally begin with Holden's frequent use of vulgar language;[45][46] other reasons include sexual references,[47] blasphemy, undermining of family values[46] and moral codes,[48] encouragement of rebellion,[49] and promotion of drinking, smoking, lying, promiscuity, and sexual abuse.[48] The book was written for an adult audience, which often forms the foundation of many challengers' arguments against it.[50] Often the challengers have been unfamiliar with the plot itself.[39] Shelley Keller-Gage, a high school teacher who faced objections after assigning the novel in her class, noted that "the challengers are being just like Holden... They are trying to be catchers in the rye."[46] Censorship of the book often causes a Streisand effect, as such incidents cause many to put themselves on the waiting list to borrow the novel, where there was no waiting list before.[51][52]

Violent reactions

Several shootings have been associated with Salinger's novel, including Robert John Bardo's murder of Rebecca Schaeffer and John Hinckley Jr.'s assassination attempt on Ronald Reagan. Additionally, after fatally shooting John Lennon, Mark David Chapman was arrested with a copy of the book that he had purchased that same day, inside of which he had written: "To Holden Caulfield, From Holden Caulfield, This is my statement".[53][54]

Commenting on the fascination of Hinckley and Chapman, Harvey Solomon-Brady wrote:

Compared to books lauded by other killers – George Orwell's 1984 by John F. Kennedy's assassin Lee Harvey Oswald, C.S. Lewis's meditations on Christianity by Gianni Versace's murderer Andrew Cunanan and Joseph Conrad's The Secret Agent by Unabomber Ted Kaczynski – The Catcher in the Rye stands out in its devastating ability to influence without explicit instruction.[55]

Attempted adaptations

In film

Early in his career, Salinger expressed a willingness to have his work adapted for the screen.[56] In 1949, a critically panned film version of his short story "Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut" was released; renamed My Foolish Heart, the film took great liberties with Salinger's plot and is widely considered to be among the reasons that Salinger refused to allow any subsequent film adaptations of his work.[20][57] The enduring success of The Catcher in the Rye, however, has resulted in repeated attempts to secure the novel's screen rights.[58]

When The Catcher in the Rye was first released, many offers were made to adapt it for the screen, including one from Samuel Goldwyn, producer of My Foolish Heart.[57] In a letter written in the early 1950s, Salinger spoke of mounting a play in which he would play the role of Holden Caulfield opposite Margaret O'Brien, and, if he couldn't play the part himself, to "forget about it." Almost 50 years later, the writer Joyce Maynard definitively concluded, "The only person who might ever have played Holden Caulfield would have been J. D. Salinger."[59]

Salinger told Maynard in the 1970s that Jerry Lewis "tried for years to get his hands on the part of Holden,"[59] the protagonist in the novel which Lewis had not read until he was in his thirties.[51] Film industry figures including Marlon Brando, Jack Nicholson, Ralph Bakshi, Tobey Maguire and Leonardo DiCaprio have tried to make a film adaptation.[60] In an interview with Premiere, John Cusack commented that his one regret about turning 21 was that he had become too old to play Holden Caulfield. Writer-director Billy Wilder recounted his abortive attempts to snare the novel's rights:

Of course I read The Catcher in the Rye... Wonderful book. I loved it. I pursued it. I wanted to make a picture out of it. And then one day a young man came to the office of Leland Hayward, my agent, in New York, and said, "Please tell Mr. Leland Hayward to lay off. He's very, very insensitive." And he walked out. That was the entire speech. I never saw him. That was J. D. Salinger and that was Catcher in the Rye.[61]

In 1961, Salinger denied Elia Kazan permission to direct a stage adaptation of Catcher for Broadway.[62] Later, Salinger's agents received bids for the Catcher film rights from Harvey Weinstein and Steven Spielberg, neither of which was even passed on to Salinger for consideration.[63]

In 2003, the BBC television program The Big Read featured The Catcher in the Rye, interspersing discussions of the novel with "a series of short films that featured an actor playing J. D. Salinger's adolescent antihero, Holden Caulfield."[62] The show defended its unlicensed adaptation of the novel by claiming to be a "literary review", and no major charges were filed.

In 2008, the rights of Salinger's works were placed in the JD Salinger Literary Trust where Salinger was the sole trustee. Phyllis Westberg, who was Salinger's agent at Harold Ober Associates in New York, declined to say who the trustees are now that the author is dead. After Salinger died in 2010, Westberg stated that nothing had changed in terms of licensing film, television, or stage rights of his works.[64] A letter written by Salinger in 1957 revealed that he was open to an adaptation of The Catcher in the Rye released after his death. He wrote: "Firstly, it is possible that one day the rights will be sold. Since there's an ever-looming possibility that I won't die rich, I toy very seriously with the idea of leaving the unsold rights to my wife and daughter as a kind of insurance policy. It pleasures me no end, though, I might quickly add, to know that I won't have to see the results of the transaction." Salinger also wrote that he believed his novel was not suitable for film treatment, and that translating Holden Caulfield's first-person narrative into voice-over and dialogue would be contrived.[65]

In 2020, Don Hahn revealed that The Walt Disney Company had almost made an animated film titled Dufus which would have been an adaptation of The Catcher in the Rye "with German shepherds", most likely akin to Oliver & Company. The idea came from then CEO Michael Eisner who loved the book and wanted to do an adaptation. After being told that J. D. Salinger would not agree to sell the film rights, Eisner stated, "Well, let's just do that kind of story, that kind of growing up, coming of age story."[66]

Banned fan sequel

In 2009, the year before he died, Salinger successfully sued to stop the U.S. publication of a novel that presents Holden Caulfield as an old man.[31][67] The novel's author, Fredrik Colting, commented: "call me an ignorant Swede, but the last thing I thought possible in the U.S. was that you banned books".[68] The issue is complicated by the nature of Colting's book, 60 Years Later: Coming Through the Rye, which has been compared to fan fiction.[69] Although commonly not authorized by writers, no legal action is usually taken against fan fiction, since it is rarely published commercially and thus involves no profit.[70]

Legacy and use in popular culture

See also

Book censorship in the United States
Le Monde's 100 Books of the Century

References

Notes

^ "CalArts Remembers Beloved Animation Instructor E. Michael Mitchell". Calarts.edu. Archived from the original on September 28, 2009. Retrieved January 30, 2010.

^ "50 Most Captivating Covers". Onlineuniversities.com. Retrieved January 30, 2010.

^ a b Burger, Nash K. (July 16, 1951). "Books of The Times". The New York Times. Retrieved March 18, 2009.

^ Costello, Donald P., and Harold Bloom. "The Language of 'The Catcher in the Rye:' Bloom's Modern Critical Interpretations: The Catcher in the Rye (2000): 11–20. Literary Reference Center. EBSCO. Web. December 1, 2010.

^ "Carte Blanche: Famous Firsts". Booklist. November 15, 2000. Retrieved December 20, 2007.

^  Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of Allusions By Elizabeth Webber, Mike Feinsilber p. 105

^ Magill, Frank N. (1991). "J. D. Salinger". Magill's Survey of American Literature. New York: Marshall Cavendish Corporation. p. 1803. ISBN 1-85435-437-X.

^ According to List of best-selling books. An earlier article says more than 20 million: Yardley, Jonathan (October 19, 2004). "J. D. Salinger's Holden Caulfield, Aging Gracelessly". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 21, 2007. It isn't just a novel, it's a dispatch from an unknown, mysterious universe, which may help explain the phenomenal sales it enjoys to this day: about 250,000 copies a year, with total worldwide sales over – probably way over – 10 million.

^ Grossman, Lev; Lacayo, Richard (October 16, 2005). "All-Time 100 Novels: The Complete List". Time.

^ a b "The 100 most frequently challenged books: 1990–1999". American Library Association. Retrieved August 13, 2009.

^ List of most commonly challenged books from the list of the one hundred most important books of the 20th century by Radcliffe Publishing Course

^ Guinn, Jeff (August 10, 2001). "'Catcher in the Rye' still influences 50 years later" (fee required). Erie Times-News. Retrieved December 18, 2007. Alternate URL

^ Salzman, Jack (1991). New essays on the Catcher in the Rye. Cambridge University Press. p. 3. ISBN 9780521377980.

^ "Hazing, Fighting, Sexual Assaults: How Valley Forge Military Academy Devolved Into "Lord of the Flies" – Mother Jones". Motherjones.com. October 30, 2005. Retrieved September 2, 2022.

^ Costello, Donald P. (October 1959). "The Language of 'The Catcher in the Rye'". American Speech. 34 (3): 172–182. doi:10.2307/454038. ISSN 0003-1283. JSTOR 454038. Most critics who glared at The Catcher in the Rye at the time of its publication thought that its language was a true and authentic rendering of teenage colloquial speech.

^ "Study Help Full Glossary". CliffsNotes. Retrieved January 9, 2024.

^ "The Catcher in the Rye: Questions and Answers". SparkNotes. Retrieved January 9, 2024.

^ Brooks, Bruce (May 1, 2004). "Holden at sixteen". Horn Book Magazine. Archived from the original on December 21, 2007. Retrieved December 19, 2007.

^ Menand, Louis (September 27, 2001). "Holden at fifty". The New Yorker. Retrieved December 19, 2007.

^ a b c Onstad, Katrina (February 22, 2008). "Beholden to Holden". CBC News. Archived from the original on February 25, 2008.

^ Graham, 33.

^ Press, Coffeetown (June 16, 2011). "A Reader's Companion to J.D. Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye (Second Edition), by Peter G. Beidler". Coffeetown Press. p. 28. Retrieved August 3, 2022.

^ Salinger (1969, p. 67)

^ Salinger (1969, p. 38)

^ Salinger (1969, p. 160)

^ Yasuhiro Takeuchi (Fall 2002). "The Burning Carousel and the Carnivalesque: Subversion and Transcendence at the Close of The Catcher in the Rye". Studies in the Novel. Vol. 34, no. 3. pp. 320–337.

^ Shields, David; Salerno, Shane (2013). Salinger (Hardcover ed.). Simon & Schuster. p. xvi. ASIN 1476744831. The Catcher in the Rye can best be understood as a disguised war novel. Salinger emerged from the war incapable of believing in the heroic, noble ideals we like to think our cultural institutions uphold. Instead of producing a combat novel, like Norman Mailer, James Jones, and Joseph Heller did, Salinger took the trauma of war and embedded it within what looked to the naked eye like a coming-of-age novel.

^ a b Medovoi, Leerom (December 1, 2005). "Rebels: Youth and the Cold War Origins of Identity". Duke University Press.

^ Stern, James (July 15, 1951). "Aw, the World's a Crumby Place". The New York Times. Retrieved March 18, 2009.

^ "Academy of Achievement – George H. W. Bush". The American Academy of Achievement. Archived from the original on February 13, 1997. Retrieved June 5, 2009.

^ a b c Rohrer, Finlo (June 5, 2009). "The why of the Rye". BBC News Magazine. BBC. Retrieved June 5, 2009.

^ a b Coles, Robert. “Holden Caulfield Is a Teenage Everyman” Social Issues in Literature: Depression in J. D. Salinger’s The Catcher in the Rye, Greenhaven Press, 2009, pages 137-47.

^ Gopnik, Adam. The New Yorker, February 8, 2010, p. 21

^ Pruchnic, Jeff. "Holden at Sixty: Reading Catcher After the Age of Irony." Critical Insights: ------------The Catcher in The Rye (2011): 49–63. Literary Reference Center. Web. February 2, 2015.

^ Gates, Bill. "The Best Books I Read in 2013". gatesnotes.com. Retrieved August 7, 2017.

^ "Celebrities Share With PARADE: 'The Book That Changed My Life'". Parade: Entertainment, Recipes, Health, Life, Holidays. June 8, 2012.

^ Yardley, Jonathan (October 19, 2004). "J.D. Salinger's Holden Caulfield, Aging Gracelessly". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 2, 2022.

^ Dutra, Fernando (September 25, 2006). "U. Connecticut: Banned Book Week celebrates freedom". The America's Intelligence Wire. Archived from the original on February 15, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2007. In 1960 a teacher in Tulsa, Okla. was fired for assigning "The Catcher in the Rye". After appealing, the teacher was reinstated, but the book was removed from the itinerary in the school.

^ a b "In Cold Fear: 'The Catcher in the Rye', Censorship, Controversies and Postwar American Character. (Book Review)". Modern Language Review. April 1, 2003. Retrieved December 19, 2007.

^ Reiff, Raychel Haugrud (2008). J.D. Salinger: The Catcher in the Rye and Other Works. Tarrytown, NY: Marshall Cavendish Corporation. p. 80. ISBN 978-0-7614-2594-6.

^ Jenkinson, Edward (1982). Censors in the Classroom. Avon Books. p. 35. ISBN 978-0380597901.

^ Andrychuk, Sylvia (February 17, 2004). "A History of J.D. Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye" (PDF). p. 6. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 28, 2007. During 1981, The Catcher in the Rye had the unusual distinction of being the most frequently censored book in the United States, and, at the same time, the second-most frequently taught novel in American public schools.

^ ""It's Perfectly Normal" tops ALA's 2005 list of most challenged books". American Library Association. Retrieved March 3, 2015.

^ "Top ten most frequently challenged books of 2009". American Library Association. Retrieved September 27, 2010.

^ "Art or trash? It makes for endless, unwinnable debate". The Topeka Capital-Journal. October 6, 1997. Archived from the original on June 6, 2008. Retrieved December 20, 2007. Another perennial target, J.D. Salinger's "Catcher in the Rye," was challenged in Maine because of the "f" word.

^ a b c Mydans, Seth (September 3, 1989). "In a Small Town, a Battle Over a Book". The New York Times. p. 2. Retrieved December 20, 2007.

^ MacIntyre, Ben (September 24, 2005). "The American banned list reveals a society with serious hang-ups". The Times. London. Archived from the original on January 11, 2008. Retrieved December 20, 2007.

^ a b Frangedis, Helen (November 1988). "Dealing with the Controversial Elements in The Catcher in the Rye". The English Journal. 77 (7): 72–75. doi:10.2307/818945. JSTOR 818945. The foremost allegation made against Catcher is... that it teaches loose moral codes; that it glorifies... drinking, smoking, lying, promiscuity, and more.

^ Yilu Zhao (August 31, 2003). "Banned, But Not Forgotten". The New York Times. Retrieved December 20, 2007. The Catcher in the Rye, interpreted by some as encouraging rebellion against authority...

^ "Banned from the classroom: Censorship and The Catcher in the Rye – English and Drama blog". blogs.bl.uk. Retrieved January 30, 2019.

^ a b Whitfield, Stephen (December 1997). "Cherished and Cursed: Toward a Social History of The Catcher in the Rye" (PDF). The New England Quarterly. 70 (4): 567–600. doi:10.2307/366646. JSTOR 366646. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 12, 2012. Retrieved November 2, 2012.

^ J.D. Salinger. Philadelphia: Chelsea House. 2001. pp. 77–105. ISBN 0-7910-6175-2.

^ Weeks, Linton (September 10, 2000). "Telling on Dad". Amarillo Globe-News. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved February 12, 2011.

^ Doyle, Aidan (December 15, 2003). "When books kill". Salon.com. Archived from the original on November 5, 2007.

^ Harvey Solomon-Brady, WhyNow, "Did The Catcher in the Rye kill John Lennon?," 8 December 2020

^ Hamilton, Ian (1988). In Search of J. D. Salinger. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-394-53468-9. p. 75.

^ a b Berg, A. Scott. Goldwyn: A Biography. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1989. ISBN 1-57322-723-4. p. 446.

^ See Dr. Peter Beidler's A Reader's Companion to J. D. Salinger's the Catcher in the Rye, Chapter 7.

^ a b Maynard, Joyce (1998). At Home in the World. New York: Picador. p. 93. ISBN 0-312-19556-7.

^ "News & Features". IFILM: The Internet Movie Guide. 2004. Archived from the original on September 6, 2004. Retrieved April 5, 2007.

^ Crowe, Cameron, ed. Conversations with Wilder. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1999. ISBN 0-375-40660-3. p. 299.

^ a b McAllister, David (November 11, 2003). "Will J. D. Salinger sue?". The Guardian. London. Retrieved April 12, 2007.

^ "Spielberg wanted to film Catcher In The Rye". Irish Examiner. December 5, 2003. Retrieved August 24, 2019.

^ "Slim chance of Catcher in the Rye movie – ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)". ABC News. ABCnet.au. January 29, 2010. Archived from the original on February 2, 2010. Retrieved January 30, 2010.

^ Connelly, Sherryl (January 29, 2010). "Could 'Catcher in the Rye' finally make it to the big screen? Salinger letter suggests yes". Daily News. New York. Retrieved January 30, 2010.

^ Taylor, Drew (August 3, 2020). "Disney Once Tried to Make an Animated 'Catcher in the Rye' — But Wait, There's More". Collider. Retrieved August 3, 2020.

^ Gross, Doug (June 3, 2009). "Lawsuit targets 'rip-off' of 'Catcher in the Rye'". CNN. Retrieved June 3, 2009.

^ Fogel, Karl (July 7, 2009). "Looks like censorship, smells like censorship... maybe it IS censorship?". QuestionCopyright.org. Archived from the original on October 6, 2022. Retrieved April 28, 2025.

^ Sutherland, John. How fanfic took over the web London Evening Standard. Retrieved July 22, 2009.

^ Rebecca Tushnet (1997). "Fan Fiction and a New Common Law". Loyola of Los Angeles Entertainment Law Journal. 17.

Bibliography

Graham, Sarah (2007). J.D. Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-34452-4.
Rohrer, Finlo (June 5, 2009). "The Why of the Rye". BBC News Magazine. BBC News.
Salinger, J. D. (1969), The Catcher in the Rye, New York: Bantam
Wahlbrinck, Bernd (2021). Looking Back After 70 Years: J.D. Salinger's Catcher in the Rye Revisited. Tumbelweed. ISBN 978-3-9821463-7-9.

Further reading

Steinle, Pamela Hunt (2000). In Cold Fear: The Catcher in the Rye Censorship Controversies and Postwar American Character. Ohio State University Press. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2018.

External links

Book Drum illustrated profile of The Catcher in the Rye; Archived September 28, 2016, at the Wayback Machine
Photos of the first edition of Catcher in the Rye
"Lawsuit targets 'rip-off' of 'Catcher in the Rye'" – CNN

vte

The Catcher in the Rye

Nine Stories
Franny and Zooey
Raise High the Roof Beam, Carpenters and Seymour: An Introduction
Three Early Stories

"Blue Melody"
"Both Parties Concerned"
"A Boy in France"
"De Daumier-Smith's Blue Period"
"Down at the Dinghy"
"Elaine"
"For Esmé—with Love and Squalor"
"A Girl I Knew"
"Go See Eddie"
"The Hang of It"
"Hapworth 16, 1924"
"The Heart of a Broken Story"
"I'm Crazy"
"The Inverted Forest"
"Just Before the War with the Eskimos"
"Last Day of the Last Furlough"
"The Laughing Man"
"The Long Debut of Lois Taggett"
"Once a Week Won't Kill You"
"A Perfect Day for Bananafish"
"Personal Notes of an Infantryman"
"Pretty Mouth and Green My Eyes"
"Slight Rebellion off Madison"
"Soft-Boiled Sergeant"
"The Stranger"
"Teddy"
"This Sandwich Has No Mayonnaise"
"Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut"
"The Varioni Brothers"
"The Young Folks"
"A Young Girl in 1941 with No Waist at All"

"Birthday Boy"
"The Boy in the People Shooting Hat"
"The Children's Echelon"
"I Went to School with Adolf Hitler"
"The Last and Best of the Peter Pans"
"Lunch for Three"
"The Magic Foxhole"
"Monologue for a Watery Highball"
"Mrs. Hincher"
"The Ocean Full of Bowling Balls"
"Paula"
"Two Lonely Men"

Matt Salinger (son)
Holden Caulfield
Glass family
Salinger v. Random House, Inc.
My Foolish Heart (1949)
Pari (1995)
Salinger (2013) (companion biography)
Manhattan's Babe (2014)
Coming Through the Rye (2015 film)
Rebel in the Rye (2017)
My Salinger Year (2020)

Category

VIAF

GermanyIsrael

A renewable resource (also known as a flow resource[note 1][1]) is a natural resource which will replenish to replace the portion depleted by usage and consumption, either through natural reproduction or other recurring processes in a finite amount of time in a human time scale. When the recovery rate of resources is unlikely to ever exceed a human time scale, these are called perpetual resources.[1] Renewable resources are a part of Earth's natural environment and the largest components of its ecosphere. A positive life-cycle assessment is a key indicator of a resource's sustainability.

Definitions of renewable resources may also include agricultural production, as in agricultural products and to an extent water resources.[2] In 1962, Paul Alfred Weiss defined renewable resources as: "The total range of living organisms providing man with life, fibres, etc...".[3] Another type of renewable resources is renewable energy resources. Common sources of renewable energy include solar, geothermal and wind power, which are all categorized as renewable resources. Fresh water is an example of a renewable resource.

Air, food and water

Water resources

Water can be considered a renewable material when carefully controlled usage and temperature, treatment, and release are followed. If not, it would become a non-renewable resource at that location. For example, as groundwater is usually removed from an aquifer at a rate much greater than its very slow natural recharge, it is a considered non-renewable resource. Removal of water from the pore spaces in aquifers may cause permanent compaction (subsidence) that cannot be renewed. 97.5% of the water on the Earth is salt water, and 3% is fresh water; slightly over two thirds of this is frozen in glaciers and polar ice caps.[4] The remaining unfrozen freshwater is found mainly as groundwater, with only a small fraction (0.008%) present above ground or in the air.[5]

Water pollution is one of the main concerns regarding water resources. It is estimated that 22% of worldwide water is used in industry.[6] Major industrial users include hydroelectric dams, thermoelectric power plants (which use water for cooling), ore and oil refineries (which use water in chemical processes) and manufacturing plants (which use water as a solvent), it is also used for dumping garbage.

Desalination of seawater is considered a renewable source of water, although reducing its dependence on fossil fuel energy is needed for it to be fully renewable.[7]

Panorama of a natural wetland (Sinclair Wetlands, New Zealand)

Non agricultural food

Food is any substance consumed to provide nutritional support for the body.[8] Most food has its origin in renewable resources. Food is obtained directly from plants and animals.

Hunting may not be the first source of meat in the modernised world, but it is still an important and essential source for many rural and remote groups. It is also the sole source of feeding for wild carnivores.[9]

Sustainable agriculture

The phrase sustainable agriculture was coined by Australian agricultural scientist Gordon McClymont.[10] It has been defined as "an integrated system of plant and animal production practices having a site-specific application that will last over the long term".[11] Expansion of agricultural land reduces biodiversity and contributes to deforestation. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations estimates that in coming decades, cropland will continue to be lost to industrial and urban development, along with reclamation of wetlands, and conversion of forest to cultivation, resulting in the loss of biodiversity and increased soil erosion.[12]

Although air and sunlight are available everywhere on Earth, crops also depend on soil nutrients and the availability of water. Monoculture is a method of growing only one crop at a time in a given field, which can damage land and cause it to become either unusable or suffer from reduced yields. Monoculture can also cause the build-up of pathogens and pests that target one specific species. The Great Irish Famine (1845–1849) is a well-known example of the dangers of monoculture.

Crop rotation and long-term crop rotations confer the replenishment of nitrogen through the use of green manure in sequence with cereals and other crops, and can improve soil structure and fertility by alternating deep-rooted and shallow-rooted plants. Other methods to combat lost soil nutrients are returning to natural cycles that annually flood cultivated lands (returning lost nutrients indefinitely) such as the Flooding of the Nile, the long-term use of biochar, and use of crop and livestock landraces that are adapted to less than ideal conditions such as pests, drought, or lack of nutrients.

Agricultural practices are one of the single greatest contributor to the global increase in soil erosion rates.[13] It is estimated that "more than a thousand million tonnes of southern Africa's soil are eroded every year. Experts predict that crop yields will be halved within thirty to fifty years if erosion continues at present rates."[14] The Dust Bowl phenomenon in the 1930s was caused by severe drought combined with farming methods that did not include crop rotation, fallow fields, cover crops, soil terracing and wind-breaking trees to prevent wind erosion.[15]

The tillage of agricultural lands is one of the primary contributing factors to erosion, due to mechanised agricultural equipment that allows for deep plowing, which severely increases the amount of soil that is available for transport by water erosion.[16][17]
The phenomenon called peak soil describes how large-scale factory farming techniques are affecting humanity's ability to grow food in the future.[18] Without efforts to improve soil management practices, the availability of arable soil may become increasingly problematic.[19][unreliable source?]

Methods to combat erosion include no-till farming, using a keyline design, growing wind breaks to hold the soil, and widespread use of compost. Fertilizers and pesticides can also have an effect of soil erosion,[20] which can contribute to soil salinity and prevent other species from growing. Phosphate is a primary component in the chemical fertiliser applied most commonly in modern agricultural production. However, scientists estimate that rock phosphate reserves will be depleted in 50–100 years and that Peak Phosphate will occur in about 2030.[21]

Industrial processing and logistics also have an effect on agriculture's sustainability. The way and locations crops are sold requires energy for transportation, as well as the energy cost for materials, labour, and transport. Food sold at a local location, such a farmers' market, have reduced energy overheads.

Air

Air is a renewable resource. All living organisms need oxygen, nitrogen (directly or indirectly), carbon (directly or indirectly) and many other gases in small quantities for their survival.

Non-food resources

An important renewable resource is wood provided by means of forestry, which has been used for construction, housing and firewood since ancient times.
[22][23][24] Plants provide the main sources for renewable resources, the main distinction is between energy crops and non-food crops. A large variety of lubricants, industrially used vegetable oils, textiles and fibre made e.g. of cotton, copra or hemp, paper derived from wood, rags or grasses, bioplastic are based on plant renewable resources. A large variety of chemical based products like latex, ethanol, resin, sugar and starch can be provided with plant renewables. Animal based renewables include fur, leather, technical fat and lubricants and further derived products, as e.g. animal glue, tendons, casings or in historical times ambra and baleen provided by whaling.

With regard to pharmacy ingredients and legal and illegal drugs, plants are important sources, however e.g. venom of snakes, frogs and insects has been a valuable renewable source of pharmacological ingredients. Before GMO production set in, insulin and important hormones were based on animal sources. Feathers, an important byproduct of poultry farming for food, is still being used as filler and as base for keratin in general. Same applies for the chitin produced in farming Crustaceans which may be used as base of chitosan. The most important part of the human body used for non-medical purposes is human hair as for artificial hair integrations, which is being traded worldwide.

Historical role

Historically, renewable resources like firewood, latex, guano, charcoal, wood ash, plant colors as indigo, and whale products have been crucial for human needs but failed to supply demand in the beginning of the industrial era.[25] Early modern times faced large problems with overuse of renewable resources as in deforestation, overgrazing or overfishing.[25]

In addition to fresh meat and milk, which as food items are not the topic of this section, livestock farmers and artisans used further animal ingredients as tendons, horn, bones, bladders. Complex technical constructions as the composite bow were based on combination of animal and plant based materials. The current distribution conflict between biofuel and food production is being described as Food vs. fuel. Conflicts between food needs and usage, as supposed by fief obligations were in so far common in historical times as well.[26] However, a significant percentage of (middle European) farmers yields went into livestock, which provides as well organic fertiliser.[27] Oxen and horses were important for transportation purposes, drove engines as e.g. in treadmills.

Other regions solved the transportation problem with terracing, urban and garden agriculture.[25] Further conflicts as between forestry and herding, or (sheep) herders and cattle farmers led to various solutions. Some confined wool production and sheep to large state and nobility domains or outsourced to professional shepherds with larger wandering herds.[28]

The British Agricultural Revolution was mainly based on a new system of crop rotation, the four-field rotation. British agriculturist Charles Townshend recognised the invention in Dutch Waasland and popularised it in the 18th century UK, George Washington Carver in the USA. The system used wheat, turnips and barley and introduced as well clover. Clover is able to fix nitrogen from air, a practically non exhaustive renewable resource, into fertilizing compounds to the soil and allowed to increase yields by large. Farmers opened up a fodder crop and grazing crop. Thus livestock could to be bred year-round and winter culling was avoided. The amount of manure rose and allowed more crops but to refrain from wood pasture.[25]

Early modern times and the 19th century saw the previous resource base partially replaced respectively supplemented by large scale chemical synthesis and by the use of fossil and mineral resources respectively.[29] Besides the still central role of wood, there is a sort of renaissance of renewable products based on modern agriculture, genetic research and extraction technology. Besides fears about an upcoming global shortage of fossil fuels, local shortages due to boycotts, war and blockades or just transportation problems in remote regions have contributed to different methods of replacing or substituting fossil resources based on renewables.

Challenges

The use of certain basically renewable products as in TCM endangers various species. Just the black market in rhinoceros horn reduced the world's rhino population by more than 90 percent over the past 40 years.[30][31]

Renewables used for self sufficiency

The success of the German chemical industry till World War I was based on the replacement of colonial products. The predecessors of IG Farben dominated the world market for synthetic dyes at the beginning of the 20th century[32][33] and had an important role in artificial pharmaceuticals, photographic film, agricultural chemicals and electrochemicals.[29]

However the former Plant breeding research institutes took a different approach. After the loss of the German colonial empire, important players in the field as Erwin Baur and Konrad Meyer switched to using local crops as base for economic autarky.[34][35] Meyer as a key agricultural scientist and spatial planner of the Nazi era managed and lead Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft resources and focused about a third of the complete research grants in Nazi Germany on agricultural and genetic research and especially on resources needed in case of a further German war effort.[34] A wide array of agrarian research institutes still existing today and having importance in the field was founded or enlarged in the time.

There were some major failures as trying to e.g. grow frost resistant olive species, but some success in the case of hemp, flax, rapeseed, which are still of current importance.[34] During World War 2, German scientists tried to use Russian Taraxacum (dandelion) species to manufacture natural rubber.[34] Rubber dandelions are still of interest, as scientists in the Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology (IME) announced 2013 to have developed a cultivar that is suitable for commercial production of natural rubber.[36]

Legal situation and subsidies

Several legal and economic means have been used to enhance the market share of renewables. 
The UK uses Non-Fossil Fuel Obligations (NFFO), a collection of orders requiring the electricity distribution network operators in England and Wales to purchase electricity from the nuclear power and renewable energy sectors. Similar mechanisms operate in Scotland (the Scottish Renewable Orders under the Scottish Renewables Obligation) and Northern Ireland (the Northern Ireland Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation). In the US, Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs), use a similar approach. German Energiewende is using feed-in tariffs. An unexpected outcome of the subsidies was the quick increase of pellet byfiring in conventional fossil fuel plants (compare Tilbury power stations) and cement works, making wood respectively biomass accounting for about half of Europe's renewable-energy consumption.[24]

Examples of industrial use

Biorenewable chemicals

Biorenewable chemicals are chemicals created by biological organisms that provide feedstocks for the chemical industry.[37] Biorenewable chemicals can provide solar-energy-powered substitutes for the petroleum-based carbon feedstocks that currently supply the chemical industry. The tremendous diversity of enzymes in biological organisms, and the potential for synthetic biology to alter these enzymes to create yet new chemical functionalities, can drive the chemical industry. A major platform for creation of new chemicals is the polyketide biosynthetic pathway, which generates chemicals containing repeated alkyl chain units with potential for a wide variety of functional groups at the different carbon atoms.[37][38][39] Polyurethane research is ongoing that specifically uses renewable resources.[40]

Bioplastics

Bioplastics are a form of plastics derived from renewable biomass sources, such as vegetable fats and oils, lignin, corn starch, pea starch[41] or microbiota.[42] The most common form of bioplastic is thermoplastic starch. Other forms include Cellulose bioplastics, biopolyester, Polylactic acid, and bio-derived polyethylene.

The production and use of bioplastics is generally regarded as a more sustainable activity when compared to plastic production from petroleum (petroplastic); however, manufacturing of bioplastic materials is often still reliant upon petroleum as an energy and materials source. Because of the fragmentation in the market and ambiguous definitions it is difficult to describe the total market size for bioplastics, but the global production capacity is estimated at 327,000 tonnes.[43] In contrast, global consumption of all flexible packaging is estimated at 12.3 million tonnes.[44]

Bioasphalt

Bioasphalt is an asphalt alternative made from non-petroleum based renewable resources. Manufacturing sources of bioasphalt include sugar, molasses and rice, corn and potato starches, and vegetable oil based waste. Asphalt made with vegetable oil based binders was patented by Colas SA in France in 2004.[45][46]

Renewable energy

Renewable energy refers to the provision of energy via renewable resources which are naturally replenished as fast as they are being used. Examples are sunlight, wind, biomass, rain, tides, waves and geothermal heat.[47] Renewable energy may replace conventional fuels in four distinct markets, namely electricity generation, hot water/space heating, motor fuels, and rural (off-grid) energy services.[48] Manufacturing of renewable energy devices uses non-renewable resources such as mined metals and land surface.

Biomass

Biomass is referring to biological material from living, or recently living organisms, most often referring to plants or plant-derived materials.

Sustainable harvesting and use of renewable resources (i.e., maintaining a positive renewal rate) can reduce air pollution, soil contamination, habitat destruction and land degradation.[49] Biomass energy is derived from six distinct energy sources: garbage, wood, plants, waste, landfill gases, and alcohol fuels. Historically, humans have harnessed biomass-derived energy since the advent of burning wood to make fire, and wood remains the largest biomass energy source today.[50][51]

However, low tech use of biomass, which still amounts for more than 10% of world energy needs may induce indoor air pollution in developing nations[52] and results in between 1.5 million and 2 million deaths in 2000.[53]

The biomass used for electricity generation varies by region.[54] Forest by-products, such as wood residues, are common in the United States.[54] Agricultural waste is common in Mauritius (sugar cane residue) and Southeast Asia (rice husks).[54] Animal husbandry residues, such as poultry litter, are common in the UK.[54] The biomass power generating industry in the United States, which consists of approximately 11,000 MW of summer operating capacity actively supplying power to the grid, produces about 1.4 percent of the U.S. electricity supply.[55]

Biofuel

A biofuel is a type of fuel whose energy is derived from biological carbon fixation. Biofuels include fuels derived from biomass conversion, as well as solid biomass, liquid fuels and various biogases.[56]

Bioethanol is an alcohol made by fermentation, mostly from carbohydrates produced in sugar or starch crops such as corn, sugarcane or switchgrass.

Biodiesel is made from vegetable oils and animal fats. Biodiesel is produced from oils or fats using transesterification and is the most common biofuel in Europe.

Biogas is methane produced by the process of anaerobic digestion of organic material by anaerobes.,[57] etc. is also a renewable source of energy.

Biogas

Biogas typically refers to a mixture of gases produced by the breakdown of organic matter in the absence of oxygen. Biogas is produced by anaerobic digestion with anaerobic bacteria or fermentation of biodegradable materials such as manure, sewage, municipal waste, green waste, plant material, and crops.[58] It is primarily methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2) and may have small amounts of hydrogen sulphide (H2S), moisture and siloxanes.

Natural fibre

Natural fibres are a class of hair-like materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated pieces, similar to pieces of thread. They can be used as a component of composite materials. They can also be matted into sheets to make products such as paper or felt. Fibres are of two types: natural fibre which consists of animal and plant fibres, and man made fibre which consists of synthetic fibres and regenerated fibres.

Threats to renewable resources

Renewable resources are endangered by non-regulated industrial developments and growth.[59] They must be carefully managed to avoid exceeding the natural world's capacity to replenish them.[60] A life cycle assessment provides a systematic means of evaluating renewability. This is a matter of sustainability in the natural environment.[61]

Overfishing

National Geographic has described ocean over fishing as "simply the taking of wildlife from the sea at rates too high for fished species to replace themselves."[62]

Tuna meat is driving overfishing as to endanger some species like the bluefin tuna. The European Community and other organisations are trying to regulate fishery as to protect species and to prevent their extinctions.[63] The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea treaty deals with aspects of overfishing in articles 61, 62, and 65.[64]

Examples of overfishing exist in areas such as the North Sea of Europe, the Grand Banks of North America and the East China Sea of Asia.[65]

The decline of penguin population is caused in part by overfishing, caused by human competition over the same renewable resources[66]

Deforestation

Besides their role as a resource for fuel and building material, trees protect the environment by absorbing carbon dioxide and by creating oxygen.[67] The destruction of rain forests is one of the critical causes of climate change. Deforestation causes carbon dioxide to linger in the atmosphere. As carbon dioxide accrues, it produces a layer in the atmosphere that traps radiation from the sun. The radiation converts to heat which causes global warming, which is better known as the greenhouse effect.[68]

Deforestation also affects the water cycle. It reduces the content of water in the soil and groundwater as well as atmospheric moisture.[69] Deforestation reduces soil cohesion, so that erosion, flooding and landslides ensue.[70][71]

Rain forests house many species and organisms providing people with food and other commodities. In this way biofuels may well be unsustainable if their production contributes to deforestation.[72]

Endangered species

Some renewable resources, species and organisms are facing a very high risk of extinction caused by growing human population and over-consumption. It has been estimated that over 40% of all living species on Earth are at risk of going extinct.[73] Many nations have laws to protect hunted species and to restrict the practice of hunting. Other conservation methods include restricting land development or creating preserves. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species is the best-known worldwide conservation status listing and ranking system.[74] Internationally, 199 countries have signed an accord agreeing to create Biodiversity Action Plans to protect endangered and other threatened species.

See also

Exploitation of natural resources
Habitat conservation
List of renewable resources produced and traded by the United Kingdom
Natural capital
Natural resource
Non-renewable resource
Recycling
Resource
Seed tree
Stewardship
Sustainable development
Scarcity

Renewable energy portalEnvironment portal

Notes

^ especially when emphasizing perpetual resources as well.

References

^ a b Park, Chris; Allaby, Michael (2017). A Dictionary of Environment and Conservation. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acref/9780191826320.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-182632-0.

^ What are "Renewable Resources"?, by A. John Armstrong, Esq. & Dr. Jan Hamrin, Chapter 1, The Renewable Energy Policy Manual, Organization of American States, undated. Retrieved 2013-01-05.

^ Paul Weiss (1962). Renewable Resources, a report to the committee on natural resources. Washington D.C.: National Academy of Science. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved 2013-01-04.

^ "Earth's water distribution". United States Geological Survey. Retrieved 2009-05-13.

^ "Scientific Facts on Water: State of the Resource". GreenFacts Website. Archived from the original on 2018-07-24. Retrieved 2008-01-31.

^ "WBCSD Water Facts & Trends". Archived from the original on 2012-03-01. Retrieved 2009-03-12.

^ Lienhard, John H.; Thiel, Gregory P.; Warsinger, David M.; Banchik, Leonardo D. (2016-12-08). "Low Carbon Desalination: Status and Research, Development, and Demonstration Needs, Report of a workshop conducted at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in association with the Global Clean Water Desalination Alliance". Prof. Lienhard Via Angie Locknar. hdl:1721.1/105755.

^ "food | Definition & Nutri ion". Encyclopedia Britannica.

^ Mammals: Carnivores. Duane E. Ullrey. Encyclopedia of Animal Science.

^ Rural Science Graduates Association (2002). "In Memorium — Former Staff and Students of Rural Science at UNE". University of New England. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013. Retrieved 21 October 2012.

^ Gold, M. (July 2009). What is Sustainable Agriculture?. United States Department of Agriculture, Alternative Farming Systems Information Center.

^ "FAO World Agriculture towards 2015/2030". Food and Agriculture Organization. 2003. Retrieved 2013-01-06.

^ Committee on 21st Century Systems Agriculture (2010). Toward Sustainable Agricultural Systems in the 21st Century. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-0-309-14896-2.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link)

^ "Musokotwane Environment Resource Centre for Southern Africa CEP Factsheet". Archived from the original on 2013-02-13. Retrieved 2013-01-06.

^ 
"Drought: A Paleo Perspective – 20th Century Drought". National Climatic Data Center. Retrieved 2009-04-05.

^ Blanco, Humberto; Lal, Rattan (2010). "Tillage erosion". Principles of Soil Conservation and Management. Springer. ISBN 978-90-481-8529-0.

^ Lobb, D.A. (2009). "Soil movement by tillage and other agricultural activities". In Jorgenson, Sven E. (ed.). Applications in Ecological Engineering. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-444-53448-4.

^ "Peak Soil: Why cellulosic ethanol, biofuels are unsustainable and a threat to America". Retrieved 2013-01-05.

^ "CopperWiki Soil erosion". Archived from the original on 2013-02-17. Retrieved 2013-01-05.

^ Vaidya, Shrijana; Hoffmann, Mathias; Holz, Maire; Macagga, Reena; Monzon, Oscar; Thalmann, Mogens; Jurisch, Nicole; Pehle, Natalia; Verch, Gernot; Sommer, Michael; Augustin, Jürgen (2023-01-01). "Similar strong impact of N fertilizer form and soil erosion state on N2O emissions from croplands". Geoderma. 429: 116243. Bibcode:2023Geode.42916243V. doi:10.1016/j.geoderma.2022.116243. ISSN 0016-7061.

^ Cordell; et al. (2009-02-11). "The story of phosphorus: Global food security and food for thought". Global Environmental Change. 19 (2): 292–305. Bibcode:2009GEC....19..292C. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.10.009.

^ "UNECE Homepage". www.unece.org.

^ "FAO Factsheet" (PDF).

^ a b Wood The fuel of the future Environmental lunacy in Europe, Economist title story Apr 6th 2013

^ a b c d Nature and Power: A Global History of the Environment. By Joachim Radkau. Publications of the German Historical Institute Series. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008

^ A short history of livestock production, J. Hartung, in Livestock housing, Modern management to ensure optimal health and welfare of farm animals, edited by: Andres Aland and Thomas Banhazi, © 2013 ISBN 978-90-8686-217-7

^ Gustav Comberg, Die deutsche Tierzucht im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert, Ulmer, 1984, ISBN 3-8001-3061-0, (History of livestock breeding in Germany)

^ Veröffentlichungen des Max-Planck-Instituts für Geschichte. 2, Band 0, Max-Planck-Institut für Geschichte, Reiner Prass, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1958, p. 58

^ a b Lesch, John E. (2000). The German Chemical Industry in the Twentieth Century. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 219.

^ "Rhino horn: All myth, no medicine", National Geographic, Rhishja Larson

^ Facts about traditional Chinese medicine (TCM): rhinoceros horn, Encyclopædia Britannica, Facts about traditional Chinese medicine (TCM): rhinoceros horn, as discussed in rhinoceros (mammal): – Britannica Online Encyclopedia

^ Aftalion, Fred; Benfey, Otto Theodor (1991). A History of the International Chemical Industry. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 104. ISBN 978-0-8122-8207-8.

^ Chandler, Alfred DuPont (2004). Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. p. 475. ISBN 978-0-674-78995-1.

^ a b c d Autarkie und Ostexpansion: Pflanzenzucht und Agrarforschung im Nationalsozialismus, (agrarian research during the NS regime) Susanne Heim, Wallstein, 2002, ISBN 3-89244-496-X

^ Heim, Susanne (2002). Autarkie und Ostexpansion: Pflanzenzucht und Agrarforschung im Nationalsozialismus, (agrarian research during the NS regime). Wallstein. ISBN 978-3-89244-496-1.

^ "Making Rubber from Dandelion Juice". sciencedaily.com. Retrieved 22 November 2013.

^ a b Nikolau, Basil J.; Perera, M. Ann D.N.; Brachova, Libuse; Shanks, Brent (2008-05-01). "Platform biochemicals for a biorenewable chemical industry". The Plant Journal. 54 (4): 536–545. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03484.x. ISSN 1365-313X. PMID 18476861.

^ Garg, Shivani; Rizhsky, Ludmila; Jin, Huanan; Yu, Xiaochen; Jing, Fuyuan; Yandeau-Nelson, Marna D.; Nikolau, Basil J. (2016). "Microbial production of bi-functional molecules by diversification of the fatty acid pathway". Metabolic Engineering. 35: 9–20. doi:10.1016/j.ymben.2016.01.003. PMID 26827988.

^ Leber, Christopher; Da Silva, Nancy A. (2014-02-01). "Engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the synthesis of short chain fatty acids". Biotechnology and Bioengineering. 111 (2): 347–358. doi:10.1002/bit.25021. ISSN 1097-0290. PMID 23928901. S2CID 8117248.

^ Malani, Ritesh S.; Malshe, Vinod C.; Thorat, Bhaskar Narayan (2022-01-01). "Polyols and polyurethanes from renewable sources: past, present and future—part 1: vegetable oils and lignocellulosic biomass". Journal of Coatings Technology and Research. 19 (1): 201–222. doi:10.1007/s11998-021-00490-0. ISSN 1935-3804. S2CID 235442129.

^ "Development of a pea starch film with trigger biodegradation properties for agricultural applications". CORDIS services. 2008-11-30. Retrieved 2009-11-24.

^ Hong Chua; Peter H. F. Yu; Chee K. Ma (March 1999). "Accumulation of biopolymers in activated sludge biomass". Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology. 78 (1–3): 389–399. doi:10.1385/ABAB:78:1-3:389. ISSN 0273-2289. PMID 15304709. S2CID 189905491.

^ NNFCC Renewable Polymers Factsheet: Bioplastics — NNFCC. Nnfcc.co.uk (2010-02-19). Retrieved on 2011-08-14.

^ "FYI charts". Plastics News. Archived from the original on 2008-05-13. Retrieved 2011-08-14.

^ "Colas S.A.: Information and Much More from". Answers.com. Retrieved 2010-06-07.

^ COLAS CST - Végécol Archived October 12, 2007, at the Wayback Machine

^ "The myth of renewable energy | Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists". Thebulletin.org. 2011-11-22. Archived from the original on 2013-10-07. Retrieved 2013-10-03.

^ REN21 (2010). Renewables Global Status Report p. 15.

^ "Benefits of Renewable Energy Use". Union of Concerned Scientists. 1999. Archived from the original on 2012-03-25. Retrieved 2013-01-04.

^ Scheck, Justin; Dugan, Ianthe Jeanne. "Wood-Fired Plants Generate Violations". WSJ. Retrieved 2012-04-12.

^ Global biomass fuel resources, Matti Parikka, in Biomass and Bioenergy, Volume 27, Issue 6, December 2004, Pages 613–620, Pellets 2002. The first world conference on pellets

^ Duflo E, Greenstone M, Hanna R (2008). "Indoor air pollution, health and economic well-being". S.A.P.I.EN.S. 1 (1).

^ Ezzati M, Kammen DM (November 2002). "The health impacts of exposure to indoor air pollution from solid fuels in developing countries: knowledge, gaps, and data needs". Environ. Health Perspect. 110 (11): 1057–68. Bibcode:2002EnvHP.110.1057E. doi:10.1289/ehp.021101057. PMC 1241060. PMID 12417475.

^ a b c d Frauke Urban and Tom Mitchell 2011. Climate change, disasters and electricity generation Archived 2012-09-20 at the Wayback Machine. London: Overseas Development Institute and Institute of Development Studies

^ "U.S. Electric Net Summer Capacity". U.S. Energy Information Administration. July 2009. Archived from the original on 2010-01-10. Retrieved 2010-01-25.

^ B.N. Divakara; H.D. Upadhyaya; S.P. Wani; C.L. Laxmipathi Gowda (2010). "Biology and genetic improvement of Jatropha curcas L.: A review" (PDF). Applied Energy. 87 (3): 732–742. Bibcode:2010ApEn...87..732D. doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2009.07.013.

^ Redman, G., The Andersons Centre. "Assessment of on-farm AD in the UK" Archived 2010-11-13 at the Wayback Machine, National Non-Food Crops Centre, 2008-06-09. Retrieved on 2009-05-11.

^ National Non-Food Crops Centre. "NNFCC Renewable Fuels and Energy Factsheet: Anaerobic Digestion", Retrieved on 2011-02-16

^ "Capitalizing on Environmental Injustice: The Polluter-Industrial Complex in the Age of Globalization", by Daniel Faber, Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 17 Jul 2008

^ "Management for a Small Planet" by Jean Garner Stead and W. Edward Stead, M.E. Sharpe 2009

^ "Environmental Science: Creating a Sustainable Future" by Daniel D. Chiras, Jones & Bartlett Learning, 21 Dec 2004

^ "Overfishing". National Geographic. Retrieved 2013-01-06.

^ COUNCIL REGULATION (EC) No 2371/2002 of 20 December 2002 on the conservation and sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources under the Common Fisheries Policy. Retrieved 2013-01-05.

^ 
"Text of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea: Part V". Retrieved 2012-05-01.

^ Lu Hui, ed. (16 August 2006). "Pollution, overfishing destroy East China Sea fishery". Xinhua on GOV.cn. Archived from the original on 2012-02-24. Retrieved 2012-05-01.

^ "Most Penguin Populations Continue to Decline, Biologists Warn". Science News. Science Daily. Sep 9, 2010. Retrieved 2013-01-05.

^ How Much Oxygen Does One Tree Produce? Archived 2012-11-15 at the Wayback Machine By Anne Marie Helmenstine, Ph.D., About.com Guide

^ Mumoki, Fiona. "The Effects of Deforestation on our Environment Today." Panorama. TakingITGlobal. 18 July 2006. Web. 24 March 2012.

^ "Underlying Causes of Deforestation". UN Secretary-General's Report. Archived from the original on 2001-04-11.

^ Daniel Rogge. "Deforestation and Landslides in Southwestern Washington". University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire. Archived from the original on 2012-08-05.

^ "China's floods: Is deforestation to blame?". BBC News. August 6, 1999. Retrieved 2013-01-05.

^ Assessing biofuels: towards sustainable production and use of resources, International Resource Panel, United Nations Environment Programme, 2009, retrieved 2013-01-05

^ "Threatened Species". Conservation and Wildlife. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2012.

^ "Red List Overview". IUCN. February 2011. Archived from the original on 27 May 2012. Retrieved 2 June 2012.

Further reading

Krzeminska, Joanna, Are Support Schemes for Renewable Energies Compatible with Competition Objectives? An Assessment of National and Community Rules, Yearbook of European Environmental Law (Oxford University Press), Volume VII, Nov. 2007, p. 125
Masters, G. M. (2004). Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems. Hoboken, NJ:John Wiley & Sons.
Panwar, N. L., Kaushik, S. C., & Kothari, S. (2011, April). Role of renewable energy sources in environmental protection: A review. Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews, 15(3), 1513–1524.
Sawin, Janet. "Charting a New Energy Future." State of the World 2003. By Lester R. Brown. Boston & Company, Incorporated, 2003.

vte

Ambient standards (US)
Index
Indoor
Law
Clean Air Act (US)
Ozone depletion

Clean Air Act (US)

Airshed
Trading
Deforestation (REDD)

Bio
Law
Resources
Fossil fuels (gas, peak coal, peak gas, peak oil)
Geothermal
Hydro
Nuclear
Solar
sunlight
shade
Wind

sunlight
shade

Agricultural
arable
peak farmland
Degradation
Field
Landscape
cityscape
seascape
soundscape
viewshed
Law
property
Management
habitat conservation
Minerals
gemstone
industrial
ore
metal
mining
law
sand
peak
copper
phosphorus
rights
Soil
conservation
fertility
health
resilience
Use
planning
reserve

arable
peak farmland

peak farmland

cityscape
seascape
soundscape
viewshed

property

habitat conservation

gemstone
industrial
ore
metal
mining
law
sand
peak
copper
phosphorus
rights

metal

law
sand

copper
phosphorus

conservation
fertility
health
resilience

planning
reserve

Biodiversity
Bioprospecting
biopiracy
Biosphere
Bushfood
Bushmeat
Fisheries
climate change
law
management
Forests
genetic resources
law
management
non-timber products
Game
law
Marine conservation
Meadow
Pasture
Plants
FAO Plant Treaty
food
genetic resources
gene banks
herbal medicines
UPOV Convention
wood
Rangeland
Seed bank
Wildlife
conservation
management

biopiracy

climate change
law
management

genetic resources
law
management
non-timber products

law

FAO Plant Treaty
food
genetic resources
gene banks
herbal medicines
UPOV Convention
wood

conservation
management

Aquifer
storage and recovery
Drinking
Fresh
Groundwater
pollution
recharge
remediation
Hydrosphere
Ice
bergs
glacial
polar
Irrigation
huerta
Marine
Rain
harvesting
Stormwater
Surface water
Sewage
reclaimed water
Watershed

storage and recovery

pollution
recharge
remediation

bergs
glacial
polar

huerta

harvesting

reclaimed water

Desalination
Floods
Law
Leaching
Sanitation
improved
Scarcity
Security
Supply
Efficiency
Conflict
Conservation
Peak water
Pollution
Privatization
Quality
Right
Resources
improved
policy

improved

improved
policy

Commons
enclosure
global
land
tragedy of
Economics
ecological
land
Ecosystem services
Exploitation
overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day
Management
adaptive
Natural capital
accounting
good
Natural heritage
Nature reserve
remnant natural area
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Wilderness

enclosure
global
land
tragedy of

ecological
land

overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day

adaptive

accounting
good

remnant natural area

Common-pool
Conflict (perpetuation)
Curse
Depletion
Extraction
Nationalism
Renewable / Non-renewable

Oil war
Petrostate
Resource war

Category

vte

Demographics of the world
Demographic transition
Estimates of historical world population
Population growth
Population momentum
Projections of population growth
World population

Population decline
Population density
Physiological density
Population dynamics
Population model
Population pyramid

Physiological density

Biocapacity
Carrying capacity
I = P × A  × T
Kaya identity
Malthusian growth model
Overshoot (population)
World3 model

Eugenics
Dysgenics
Human overpopulation
Malthusian catastrophe
Human population planning
Compulsory sterilization
Family planning
One-child policy
Two-child policy
Overconsumption
Political demography
Population ethics
Antinatalism
Mere addition paradox
Natalism
Non-identity problem
Reproductive rights
Sustainable population
Zero population growth

Malthusian catastrophe

Compulsory sterilization
Family planning
One-child policy
Two-child policy

Antinatalism
Mere addition paradox
Natalism
Non-identity problem
Reproductive rights

Population and Environment
Population and Development Review

Population and housing censuses by country
Largest cities
World population milestones
6 billion
7
8
Population concern organizations

6 billion
7
8

7 Billion Actions
Church of Euthanasia
International Conference on Population and Development
Population Action International
Population Connection
Population Matters
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations world population conferences
Voluntary Human Extinction Movement
World Population Conference
World Population Day
World Population Foundation

Bennett's law
Green Revolution
Human impact on the environment
Migration
Net migration rate
Sustainability

Net migration rate

Commons
 Category

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataIsrael

The Great Wall of China (traditional Chinese: 萬里長城; simplified Chinese: 万里长城; pinyin: Wànlǐ Chángchéng, literally "ten thousand li long wall") is a series of fortifications in China. They were built across the historical northern borders of ancient Chinese states and Imperial China as protection against various nomadic groups from the Eurasian Steppe. The first walls date to the 7th century BC; these were joined together in the Qin dynasty.[4][5] Successive dynasties expanded the wall system; the best-known sections were built by the Ming dynasty (1368–1644).

To aid in defense, the Great Wall utilized watchtowers, troop barracks, garrison stations, signaling capabilities through the means of smoke or fire, and its status as a transportation corridor. Other purposes of the Great Wall have included border controls (allowing control of immigration and emigration, and the imposition of duties on goods transported along the Silk Road), and the regulation of trade.[6]

The collective fortifications constituting the Great Wall stretch from Liaodong in the east to Lop Lake in the west, and from the present-day Sino–Russian border in the north to Tao River in the south: an arc that roughly delineates the edge of the Mongolian steppe, spanning 21,196.18 km (13,170.70 mi) in total.[7][3] It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and was voted one of the New 7 Wonders of the World in 2007.[8][9] Today, the defensive system of the Great Wall is recognized as one of the most impressive architectural feats in history.[10]

Names

The collection of fortifications known as the Great Wall of China has historically had a number of different names in both Chinese and English.

In Chinese histories, the term "Long Wall(s)" (t 長城, s 长城, Chángchéng) appears in Sima Qian's Records of the Grand Historian, where it referred both to the separate great walls built between and north of the Warring States and to the more unified construction of the First Emperor.[11] The Chinese character 城, meaning city or fortress, is a phono-semantic compound of the "earth" radical 土 and phonetic 成, whose Old Chinese pronunciation has been reconstructed as *deŋ.[12] It originally referred to the rampart which surrounded traditional Chinese cities and was used by extension for these walls around their respective states; today, however, it is more commonly used to mean "city".[13]

The longer Chinese name "Ten-Thousand Mile Long Wall" (t 萬里長城, s 万里长城, Wànlǐ Chángchéng) came from Sima Qian's description of it in the Records, though he did not name the walls themselves as such. The AD 493 Book of Song quotes the frontier general Tan Daoji referring to "the long wall of 10,000 miles", closer to the modern name, but the name rarely features in pre-modern times otherwise.[14] The traditional Chinese mile (里, lǐ) was an often irregular distance that was intended to show the length of a standard village and varied with terrain but was usually standardized at distances around a third of an English mile (540 m).[15] However, this use of "ten-thousand" (wàn) is figurative in a similar manner to the Greek and English myriad and simply means "innumerable" or "immeasurable".[16]

Because of the wall's association with the First Emperor's supposed tyranny, the Chinese dynasties after Qin usually avoided referring to their own additions to the wall by the name "Long Wall".[17] Instead, various terms were used in medieval records, including "frontier(s)" (塞, Sài),[18] "rampart(s)" (垣, Yuán),[18] "barrier(s)" (障, Zhàng),[18] "the outer fortresses" (外堡, Wàibǎo),[19] and "the border wall(s)" (t 邊牆, s 边墙, Biānqiáng).[17] Poetic and informal names for the wall included "the Purple Frontier" (紫塞, Zǐsài)[20] and "the Earth Dragon" (t 土龍, s 土龙, Tǔlóng).[21] Only during the Qing period did "Long Wall" become the catch-all term to refer to the many border walls regardless of their location or dynastic origin, equivalent to the English "Great Wall".[22]

Sections of the wall in south Gobi Desert and Mongolian steppe are sometimes referred to as "Wall of Genghis Khan", even though Genghis Khan did not construct any walls or permanent defense lines himself.[23]

The current English name evolved from accounts of "the Chinese wall" from early modern European travelers.[22] By the nineteenth century,[22] "the Great Wall of China" had become standard in English and French, although other European languages such as German continue to refer to it as "the Chinese wall".[16]

History

Early walls

The Chinese were already familiar with the techniques of wall-building by the time of the Spring and Autumn period between the 8th and 5th centuries BC.[24] During this time and the subsequent Warring States period, the states of Qin, Wei, Zhao, Qi, Han, Yan, and Zhongshan all constructed extensive fortifications to defend their own borders.[25][26] Built to withstand the attack of small arms such as swords and spears, these walls were made mostly of stone or by stamping earth and gravel between board frames.

The state of Qin emerged victorious in 221 BC; its ruler, now the First Emperor of a unified China, intended to centralize rule and prevent the resurgence of feudal lords; in doing so, he ordered the destruction of the sections of the walls that divided his empire among the former states. To position the empire against the Xiongnu people from the north, however, he ordered the building of new walls to connect the remaining fortifications along the northern frontier. "Build and move on" was a central guiding principle in constructing the wall, implying that the Chinese were not erecting a permanently fixed border.[27]

Transporting the large quantity of materials required for construction was difficult, so builders always tried to use local resources; stone was used in montane areas, while rammed earth was used while building in the plains. There are no surviving historical records indicating the exact length and course of the Qin walls; most of the ancient walls have eroded away over the centuries, and very few sections remain today. The human cost of the construction is unknown, but it has been estimated by some authors that hundreds of thousands of workers died building the Qin wall.[28] Later, the Han, the Northern dynasties and the Sui all repaired, rebuilt, or expanded sections of the Great Wall at great cost to defend themselves against northern invaders.[29][30] The Tang and Song dynasties did not undertake any significant effort in the region.[30] Dynasties founded by non-Han ethnic groups also built border walls: the Xianbei-ruled Northern Wei, the Khitan-ruled Liao, Jurchen-led Jin and the Tangut-established Western Xia, who ruled vast territories over Northern China throughout centuries, all constructed defensive walls, albeit being further north—reaching into the environs of present-day Mongolia—than Han-built fortifications.[31]

Ming and Qing eras

The Ming dynasty made substantial contributions to the Great Wall, following their defeat to the Oirats in the Battle of Tumu. This defeat had come in the context of protracted conflict with Mongol tribes; a new strategy for defense was thus realized by constructing walls along the northern border of China. Acknowledging the Mongol control established in the Ordos Desert, the wall followed the desert's southern edge, instead of incorporating the bend of the Yellow River.

Unlike the earlier fortifications, the Ming construction was stronger and more elaborate, due to the use of bricks and stone instead of rammed earth. Up to 25,000 watchtowers are estimated to have been constructed on the wall.[32] As Mongol raids continued periodically over the years, the Ming devoted considerable resources to repair and reinforce the walls; sections near the Ming capital of Beijing were especially strong.[33] Under general Qi Jiguang's supervision, 1,200 watchtowers from Shanhaiguan Pass to Changping were constructed between 1567 and 1570, and sections of the ram-earth wall were faced with bricks.[34]

During the mid–15th century, the Ming also built a so-called "Liaodong Wall". It enclosed the agricultural heartland of the Liaodong province, protecting it against potential incursions by Jurchen-Mongol Oriyanghan from the northwest and the Jianzhou Jurchens from the north. While stones and tiles were sometimes used here, it was otherwise simply an earth dike with moats on both sides.[35]

Towards the end of the Ming, the Great Wall helped defend the empire against the Manchu invasions that began around 1600. Even after the loss of all of Liaodong, the Ming army held the heavily fortified Shanhai Pass, preventing the Manchus from conquering the Chinese heartland. The Manchus were finally able to cross the Great Wall in 1644, after Beijing had already fallen to Li Zicheng's short-lived Shun dynasty. Before this time, the Manchus had crossed the Great Wall multiple times to raid, but this time it was for conquest. The gates at Shanhai Pass were opened on May 25 by the commanding Ming general, Wu Sangui, who formed an alliance with the Manchus, hoping to use the Manchus to expel the rebels from Beijing.[36] The Manchus quickly seized Beijing instead, and eventually defeated both the Shun dynasty and the remaining Ming resistance, consolidating the rule of the Qing dynasty over all of China proper.[37]

Under Qing rule and the annexation of Mongolia into the empire, China's borders extended beyond the Great Wall; work on it for the purpose of border defense was thus discontinued. Construction nevertheless persisted with projects like the Willow Palisade; following a line similar to that of the Liaodong Wall of the Ming, it was meant to prevent Han Chinese migration into Manchuria.[38]

Foreign accounts

None of the Europeans who visited China or Mongolia in the 13th and 14th centuries, such as Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, William of Rubruck, Marco Polo, Odoric of Pordenone and Giovanni de' Marignolli, mentioned the Great Wall.[40][41]

The North African traveler Ibn Battuta, who also visited China during the Yuan dynasty c. 1346, had heard about China's Great Wall, possibly before he had arrived in China.[42] He wrote that the wall is "sixty days' travel" from Zeitun (modern Quanzhou) in his travelogue Gift to Those Who Contemplate the Wonders of Cities and the Marvels of Travelling. He associated it with the legend of the wall mentioned in the Qur'an,[43] which Dhul-Qarnayn (commonly associated with Alexander the Great) was said to have erected to protect people near the land of the rising sun from the savages of Gog and Magog. However, Ibn Battuta could find no one who had either seen it or knew of anyone who had seen it, suggesting that although there were remnants of the wall at that time, they were not significant.[44]

Soon after Europeans reached Ming China by ship in the early 16th century, accounts of the Great Wall started to circulate in Europe, even though no European was to see it for another century. Possibly one of the earliest European descriptions of the wall and of its significance for the defense of the country against the "Tartars" (i.e. Mongols) may be the one contained in João de Barros's 1563 Asia.[45] Other early accounts in Western sources include those of Gaspar da Cruz, Bento de Goes, Matteo Ricci, and Bishop Juan González de Mendoza,[46] the latter in 1585 describing it as a "superbious and mightie work" of architecture, though he had not seen it.[47] In 1559, in his work "A Treatise of China and the Adjoyning Regions", Gaspar da Cruz offers an early discussion of the Great Wall.[46] Perhaps the first recorded instance of a European actually entering China via the Great Wall came in 1605, when the Portuguese Jesuit brother Bento de Góis reached the northwestern Jiayu Pass from India.[48] Early European accounts were mostly modest and empirical, closely mirroring contemporary Chinese understanding of the Wall,[49] although later they slid into hyperbole,[50] including the erroneous but ubiquitous claim that the Ming walls were the same ones that were built by the first emperor in the 3rd century BC.[50]

When China opened its borders to foreign merchants and visitors after its defeat in the First and Second Opium Wars, the Great Wall became a main attraction for tourists. The travelogues of the later 19th century further enhanced the reputation and the mythology of the Great Wall.[51]

Course

A formal definition of what constitutes a "Great Wall" has not been agreed upon, making the full course of the Great Wall difficult to describe in its entirety.[52] The defensive lines contain multiple stretches of ramparts, trenches and ditches, as well as individual fortresses.

In 2012, based on existing research and the results of a comprehensive mapping survey, the National Cultural Heritage Administration of China concluded that the remaining Great Wall associated sites include 10,051 wall sections, 1,764 ramparts or trenches, 29,510 individual buildings, and 2,211 fortifications or passes, with the walls and trenches spanning a total length of 21,196.18 km (13,170.70 mi).[3] It was further concluded that the Ming Great Wall measures 8,850 km (5,500 mi).[53] This consists of 6,259 km (3,889 mi) of wall sections, 359 km (223 mi) of trenches and 2,232 km (1,387 mi) of natural defensive barriers such as hills and rivers.[53] In addition, Qin, Han and earlier Great Wall sites are 3,080 km (1,914 mi) long in total; Jin dynasty (1115–1234) border fortifications are 4,010 km (2,492 mi) in length; the remainder date back to Northern Wei, Northern Qi, Sui, Tang, the Five Dynasties, Song, Liao and Xixia.[3] About half of the sites are located in Inner Mongolia and Hebei (31% and 19% respectively).[3]

Han Great Wall

Han fortifications start from Yumen Pass and Yang Pass, southwest of Dunhuang, in Gansu province. Ruins of the remotest Han border posts are found in Mamitu (t 馬迷途, s 马迷途, Mǎmítú, l "horses losing their way") near Yumen Pass.

Ming Great Wall

The Jiayu Pass, located in Gansu province, is the western terminus of the Ming Great Wall. From here, the wall travels discontinuously down the Hexi Corridor and into the deserts of Ningxia, where it enters the western edge of the Yellow River loop at Yinchuan. Here the first major walls erected during the Ming dynasty cut through the Ordos Desert to the eastern edge of the Yellow River loop. There, at Piantou Pass (t 偏頭關, s 偏头关, Piāntóuguān) in Xinzhou, Shanxi, the Great Wall splits in two with the "Outer Great Wall" (t 外長城, s 外长城, Wài Chǎngchéng) extending along the Inner Mongolia border with Shanxi into Hebei province, and the "Inner Great Wall" (t 內長城, s 內长城, Nèi Chǎngchéng) running southeast from Piantou Pass for some 400 km (250 mi), passing through important passes like the Pingxing Pass and Yanmen Pass before joining the Outer Great Wall at Sihaiye (四海冶, Sìhǎiyě), in Beijing's Yanqing County.

The sections of the Great Wall around Beijing, were frequently renovated, and are regularly visited by tourists today. The Badaling Great Wall near Zhangjiakou is the most famous stretch of the wall, as it was the first section to be opened to the public in the People's Republic of China; foreign dignitaries would be shown this section on visits to the Great Wall.[54] The Badaling Great Wall saw nearly 10 million visitors in 2018, and in 2019, a daily limit of 65,000 visitors was instated.[55] South of Badaling is the Juyong Pass; when it was used by the Chinese to protect their land, this section of the wall had many guards to defend the capital Beijing. Made of stone and bricks from the hills, this portion of the Great Wall is 7.8 m (25 ft 7 in) high and 5 m (16 ft 5 in) wide.

One of the most striking sections of the Ming Great Wall is where it climbs extremely steep slopes in Jinshanling. There it runs 11 km (7 mi) long, ranges from 5 to 8 m (16 ft 5 in to 26 ft 3 in) in height, and 6 m (19 ft 8 in) across the bottom, narrowing up to 5 m (16 ft 5 in) across the top. Wangjing Lou (t 望京樓, s 望京楼, Wàngjīng Lóu) is one of Jinshanling's 67 watchtowers, 980 m (3,220 ft) above sea level. Southeast of Jinshanling is the Mutianyu Great Wall which winds along lofty, cragged mountains from the southeast to the northwest for 2.25 km (1.40 mi). It is connected with Juyongguan Pass to the west and Gubeikou to the east. This section was one of the first to be renovated following the turmoil of the Cultural Revolution.[56]

At the edge of the Bohai Gulf is Shanhai Pass, considered the traditional end of the Great Wall and the "First Pass Under Heaven". The part of the wall inside Shanhai Pass that meets the sea is named the "Old Dragon Head". 3 km (2 mi) north of Shanhai Pass is Jiaoshan Great Wall (t 焦山長城, s 焦山长城, Jiāoshān Chángchéng), the site of the first mountain of the Great Wall.[57] 15 km (9 mi) northeast from Shanhaiguan is Jiumenkou (t 九門口, s 九门口, Jiǔménkǒu), which is the only portion of the wall that was built as a bridge.

In 2009, 180 km of previously unknown sections of the Ming wall concealed by hills, trenches and rivers were discovered with the help of infrared range finders and GPS devices.[58] In March and April 2015, nine sections with a total length of more than 10 km (6 mi), believed to be part of the Great Wall, were discovered along the border of Ningxia autonomous region and Gansu province.[59]

Characteristics

Before the use of bricks, the Great Wall was mainly built from rammed earth, stones, and wood. During the Ming, however, bricks were heavily used in many areas of the wall, as were materials such as tiles, lime, and stone. The size and weight of the bricks made them easier to work with than earth and stone, so construction quickened. Additionally, bricks could bear more weight and endure better than rammed earth. Stone can hold under its own weight better than brick, but is more difficult to use. Consequently, stones cut into rectangular shapes were used for the foundation, inner and outer brims, and gateways of the wall. Battlements line the uppermost portion of the vast majority of the wall, with defensive gaps a little over 30 cm (12 in) tall, and about 23 cm (9.1 in) wide. From the parapets, guards could survey the surrounding land.[60]

Sticky rice mortar, consisting of sticky rice soup mixed with slaked lime, was extensively used to hold bricks together;[61][62] no human bones or body parts were ever incorporated into the mortar or any part of the wall, contrary to urban legend.[63][64] Communication between the army units along the length of the Great Wall, including the ability to call reinforcements and warn garrisons of enemy movements, was of high importance. Signal towers were built upon hill tops or other high points along the wall for their visibility. Wooden gates could be used as a trap against those going through. Barracks, stables, and armories were built near the wall's inner surface.[60]

Condition

While portions north of Beijing and near tourist centers have been preserved and even extensively renovated, in many other locations the wall is in disrepair. The wall sometimes provided a source of stones to build houses and roads.[65] Sections of the wall are also prone to graffiti and vandalism, while inscribed bricks were pilfered and sold on the market for up to 50 renminbi.[66] Parts have been destroyed to make way for construction or mining.[67]

A 2012 report by the National Cultural Heritage Administration states that 22% of the Ming Great Wall has disappeared, while 1,961 km (1,219 mi) of wall have vanished.[66] In 2007 it was estimated that more than 60 km (37 mi) of the wall in Gansu province may disappear in the next 20 years, due to erosion from sandstorms. In some places, the height of the wall has been reduced from more than 5 m (16 ft 5 in) to less than 2 m (6 ft 7 in). Various square lookout towers that characterize the most famous images of the wall have disappeared. Many western sections of the wall are constructed from mud, rather than brick and stone, and thus are more susceptible to erosion.[68] In 2014 a portion of the wall near the border of Liaoning and Hebei province was repaired with concrete. The work has been much criticized.[69]

A section of the wall in Shanxi province was severely damaged in 2023 by construction workers, who widened an existing gap in the wall to make a shortcut for an excavator to pass through. Police described the act as causing "irreversible damage to the integrity of the Ming Great Wall and to the safety of the cultural relics".[70]

Visibility from space

Various factoids in popular culture claim that the Great Wall can be seen (with the naked eye) from space, with questionable degrees of veracity.

From the Moon

The Great Wall of China cannot be seen by the naked human eye from the Moon.[71] Even though the myth is thoroughly debunked, it is still ingrained in popular culture.[72][73] The apparent width of the Great Wall as seen from the Moon would be the same as that of a human hair viewed from 3 km (2 mi) away.[74]

One of the earliest known references to the myth of the Great Wall's visibility from the Moon appears in a letter written in 1754 by the English antiquary William Stukeley. Stukeley wrote that, "This mighty wall [Hadrian's wall] of four score miles [130 km] in length is only exceeded by the Chinese Wall, which makes a considerable figure upon the terrestrial globe, and may be discerned at the Moon."[75] The claim was also mentioned by Henry Norman in 1895, writing "besides its age it enjoys the reputation of being the only work of human hands on the globe visible from the Moon."[76] The myth also appears in the 1932 strip of Ripley's Believe It or Not!.[77]

From low Earth orbit

The Great Wall has also been claimed to be visible from low Earth orbit (an altitude extending from 160 km (100 mi)). NASA states that it is barely visible, and only under nearly perfect conditions; it is no more conspicuous than many other human-made objects.[78]

Astronauts testifying to its visibility from space include Gene Cernan[a] and Ed Lu;[b] Yang Liwei, China's first astronaut, meanwhile stated that he had not been able to see it. In response, the European Space Agency (ESA) issued a press release reporting of its visibility from an altitude of 160 and 320 km (100 and 200 mi);[74] the image was actually of a river in Beijing.[79]

Leroy Chiao, a Chinese-American astronaut, took a photograph from the International Space Station that shows the wall. It was so indistinct that the photographer was not certain he had actually captured it. Based on the photograph, the China Daily later reported that the Great Wall can be seen from 'space' with the naked eye, under favorable viewing conditions, if one knows exactly where to look.[80][74]

Gallery

The Great Wall at Badaling



The Great Wall at dawn



The Juyongguan area of the Great Wall accepts numerous tourists each day.



Remains of Beacon tower, near Yumenguan, 2011



"The First Mound" – at Jiayu Pass, the western terminus of the Ming wall



The Great Wall near Jiayu Pass, Qilian Mountains in behind



Ming Great Wall remnant, near Yinchuan



The Great Wall remnant at Yulin



Gateway of Gubeikou Fortress



Environmental protection sign, near Great Wall, 2011



Ming Great Wall at Simatai, overlooking the gorge



Mutianyu Great Wall. This is atop the wall on a section that has not been restored.



The Old Dragon Head, the Great Wall where it meets the sea in the vicinity of Shanhai Pass



Inside the watchtower



Inside a watchtower



Badaling Great Wall during winter



Great Wall in Yanqing, Beijing during winter



Tourists at The Great Wall in Yanqing, Beijing during Spring Festival



Tourists at The Great Wall



A sign discouraging climbing near an unrestored section in Huaibei

See also

Cheolli Jangseong
Chinese city wall
Defense of the Great Wall
Gates of Alexander
Grand Canal (China)
Great Wall of China hoax
Great Wall Marathon
Great Wall of Gorgan
Great Wall of India
List of World Heritage Sites in China
Miaojiang Great Wall
Offa's Dyke
Roman military frontiers and fortifications
Zasechnaya cherta

Notes

^ "At Earth orbit of 100 to 200 miles [160 to 320 km] high, the Great Wall of China is, indeed, visible to the naked eye."

^ "It's less visible than a lot of other objects. And you have to know where to look."

References

^ "China's Great Wall Found To Measure More Than 20,000 Kilometers". Bloomberg. June 5, 2012. Retrieved June 6, 2012.

^ "China's Great Wall is 'longer than previously thought'". BBC News. June 6, 2012. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved December 28, 2021.

^ a b c d e 中国长城保护报告 [Protection Report of the Great Wall of China]. National Cultural Heritage Administration.

^ The New York Times with introduction by Sam Tanenhaus (2011). The New York Times Guide to Essential Knowledge: A Desk Reference for the Curious Mind. St. Martin's Press of Macmillan Publishers. p. 1131. ISBN 978-0-312-64302-7. Beginning as separate sections of fortification around the 7th century B.C.E and unified during the Qin Dynasty in the 3rd century B.C.E, this wall, built of earth and rubble with a facing of brick or stone, runs from east to west across China for over 4,000 miles.

^ "Great Wall of China". Encyclopædia Britannica. October 21, 2023. Large parts of the fortification system date from the 7th through the 4th century BC. In the 3rd century BC Shihuangdi (Qin Shi Huang), the first emperor of a united China (under the Qin dynasty), connected a number of existing defensive walls into a single system. Traditionally, the eastern terminus of the wall was considered to be Shanhai Pass (Shanhaiguan) on the coast of the Bohai (Gulf of Zhili), and the wall's length – without its branches and other secondary sections – was thought to extend for some 6,690 km (4,160 mi).

^ Shelach-Lavi, Gideon; Wachtel, Ido; Golan, Dan; Batzorig, Otgonjargal; Amartuvshin, Chunag; Ellenblum, Ronnie; Honeychurch, William (June 2020). "Medieval long-wall construction on the Mongolian Steppe during the eleventh to thirteenth centuries AD". Antiquity. 94 (375): 724–741. doi:10.15184/aqy.2020.51. ISSN 0003-598X.

^ "Great Wall of China even longer than previously thought". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. June 6, 2012. Retrieved June 6, 2012.

^ Centre, UNESCO World Heritage. "The Great Wall". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Retrieved January 6, 2025.

^ "Great Wall of China". New7Wonders of the World. August 8, 2016. Retrieved January 6, 2025.

^ "Great Wall of China". History. April 20, 2009.

^ Waldron 1983, p. 650.

^ Baxter, William H. & al. (September 20, 2014). "Baxter–Sagart Old Chinese Reconstruction, Version 1.1" (PDF). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan. Retrieved January 22, 2015.

^ See Lovell 2006, p. 25

^ Waldron 1990, p. 202. Tan Daoji's exact quote: "So you would destroy your Great Wall of Ten Thousand Li!" (乃復壞汝萬里之長城) Note the use of the particle 之 zhi that differentiates the quote from the modern name.

^ Byron R. Winborn (1994). Wen Bon: a Naval Air Intelligence Officer behind Japanese lines in China. University of North Texas Press. p. 63. ISBN 978-0-929398-77-8.

^ a b Lindesay, William (2007). The Great Wall Revisited: From the Jade Gate to Old Dragon's Head. Beijing: Wuzhou Publishing. p. 21. ISBN 978-7-5085-1032-3.

^ a b Waldron 1983, p. 651.

^ a b c Lovell 2006, p. 15.

^ Waldron 1990, p. 49.

^ Waldron 1990, p. 21.

^ Waldron 1988, p. 69.

^ a b c Hessler 2007, p. 59.

^ Man, John (2008). "6. WALL-HUNT IN THE GOBI". The Great Wall: The extraordinary history of China's wonder of the world. TRANSWORLD PUBLISHERS LTD. pp. 132–148. ISBN 9780553817683.

^ 歷代王朝修長城 (in Chinese). Chiculture.net. Retrieved October 24, 2010.

^ 古代长城 – 战争与和平的纽带 (in Chinese). Newsmth.net. Retrieved October 24, 2010.

^ 万里长城 (in Chinese). Newsmth.net. Retrieved October 24, 2010.

^ Burbank, Jane; Cooper, Frederick (2010). Empires in World History: Power and the Politics of Difference. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. p. 45.

^ Slavicek, Mitchell & Matray 2005, p. 35.

^ Coonan, Clifford (February 27, 2012). "British researcher discovers piece of Great Wall 'marooned outside China'". The Irish Times. Retrieved February 28, 2012.

^ a b Waldron 1983, p. 653.

^ Waldron 1983, p. 654; Haw 2006, pp. 52–54.

^ Szabó, Dávid & Loczy 2010, p. 220.

^ Evans 2006, p. 177.

^ "Great Wall at Mutianyu". Great Wall of China. Archived from the original on March 9, 2013.

^ Edmonds 1985, pp. 38–40.

^ Lovell 2006, p. 254.

^ Elliott 2001, pp. 1–2.

^ Elliott, Mark C. "The Limits of Tartary: Manchuria in Imperial and National Geographies". Journal of Asian Studies 59, no. 3 (2000): 603–646.

^ "Part of the Great Wall of China". The Wesleyan Juvenile Offering: A Miscellany of Missionary Information for Young Persons. X: 41. April 1853. Retrieved February 29, 2016.

^ Ruysbroek, Willem van (1900) [1255]. The Journey of William of Rubruck to the Eastern Parts of the World, 1253–55, as Narrated by Himself, with Two Accounts of the Earlier Journey of John of Pian de Carpine. Translated from the Latin by William Woodville Rockhill. London: The Hakluyt Society.

^ Haw 2006, pp. 53–54.

^ Haw 2006, pp. 54–55.

^ Qur'an, XVIII: "The Cave". English translations hosted at Wikisource include Maulana Muhammad Ali's, E.H. Palmer's, and the Progressive Muslims Organization's.

^ Haw 2006, pp. 53–55.

^ Barros, João de (1777) [1563]. Ásia de João de Barros: Dos feitos que os portugueses fizeram no descobrimento dos mares e terras do Oriente. Vol. V. Lisbon: Lisboa. 3a Década, pp. 186–204 (originally Vol. II, Ch. vii).

^ a b Waldron 1990, pp. 204–05.

^ Lach, Donald F (1965). Asia in the Making of Europe. Vol. I. The University of Chicago Press. p. 769.

^ Yule 1866, p. 579This section is the report of Góis's travel, as reported by Matteo Ricci in De Christiana expeditione apud Sinas (published 1615), annotated by Henry Yule).

^ Waldron 1990, pp. 2–4.

^ a b Waldron 1990, p. 206.

^ Waldron 1990, p. 209.

^ Hessler 2007, p. 60.

^ a b "Great Wall of China 'even longer'". BBC. April 20, 2009. Retrieved April 20, 2009.

^ Rojas 2010, p. 140.

^ Askhar, Aybek. "Limit placed on number of visitors to Great Wall". China Daily. Retrieved August 10, 2020.

^ Lindesay 2008, p. 212.

^ "Jiaoshan Great Wall". TravelChinaGuide.com. Retrieved September 15, 2010. Jiaoshan Great Wall is located about 3 km (2 mi) from Shanhaiguan ancient city. It is named after Jiaoshan Mountain, which is the highest peak to the north of Shanhai Pass and also the first mountain the Great Wall climbs up after Shanhai Pass. Therefore Jiaoshan Mountain is noted as "The first mountain of the Great Wall".

^ "Great Wall of China longer than believed as 180 missing miles found". The Guardian. Associated Press. April 20, 2009. Retrieved April 18, 2015.

^ "Newly-discovered remains redraw path of Great Wall". China Daily. April 15, 2015. Archived from the original on April 18, 2015. Retrieved April 18, 2015.

^ a b Turnbull 2007, p. 29.

^ "Sticky rice porridge and the Great Wall of China". World Archaeology. July 6, 2010. Retrieved July 6, 2022.

^ Boissoneault, Lorraine (February 16, 2017). "Sticky Rice Mortar, the View From Space, and More Fun Facts About China's Great Wall". Smithsonian. Retrieved July 6, 2022.

^ Nanos, Janelle (November 12, 2010). "Slide Down the Great Wall of China". National Geographic. Retrieved July 6, 2022. [...] (in fact, there have been no bones, human or otherwise, found in the Wall, though a great number of workers did die while toiling to build it).

^ Horsford, Simon (February 17, 2017). "Five myths about the Great Wall of China". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on February 20, 2017. Retrieved July 6, 2022. No bones or indeed other indication of human remains have been found in the Wall.

^ Ford, Peter (November 30, 2006). New law to keep China's Wall looking great. Christian Science Monitor, Asia Pacific section. Retrieved March 17, 2007.

^ a b Wong, Edward (June 29, 2015). "China Fears Loss of Great Wall, Brick by Brick". The New York Times. Retrieved July 1, 2015.

^ Bruce G. Doar: The Great Wall of China: Tangible, Intangible and Destructible. China Heritage Newsletter, China Heritage Project, Australian National University

^ "China's Wall becoming less and less Great". Reuters. August 29, 2007. Retrieved August 30, 2007.

^ Ben Westcott; Serenitie Wang (September 21, 2016). "China's Great Wall covered in cement". CNN.

^ "China's Great Wall damaged by workers looking for shortcut". September 5, 2023 – via www.bbc.co.uk.

^ "NASA - China's Wall Less Great in View from Space". www.nasa.gov. Retrieved June 7, 2021.

^ Urban Legends.com website Archived March 3, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Accessed May 12, 2010."Can you see the Great Wall of China from the moon or outer space? Archived May 11, 2013, at the Wayback Machine", Answers.com. Accessed May 12, 2010.Cecil Adams, "Is the Great wall of China the only manmade object byou can see from space?", The Straight Dope. Accessed May 12, 2010.Snopes, "Great wall from space", last updated July 21, 2007. Accessed May 12, 2010."Is China's Great Wall Visible from Space?", Scientific American, February 21, 2008. "... the wall is only visible from low orbit under a specific set of weather and lighting conditions. And many other structures that are less spectacular from an earthly vantage point—desert roads, for example—appear more prominent from an orbital perspective."

^ "Metro Tescos". The Times. April 26, 2010.

^ a b c López-Gil 2008, pp. 3–4.

^ The Family Memoirs of the Rev. William Stukeley (1887) Vol. 3, p. 142. (1754).

^ Norman, Henry, The Peoples and Politics of the Far East, p. 215. (1895).

^ ""The Great Wall of China", Ripley's Believe It or Not!, 1932.

^ "NASA – Great Wall of China". Nasa.gov. Retrieved July 31, 2010.

^ "People's Daily Online -- ESA admits "Great Wal" on satellite photo a mistake". Archived from the original on September 4, 2022. Retrieved September 4, 2022.

^ Markus, Francis. (April 19, 2005). Great Wall visible in space photo. BBC News, Asia-Pacific section. Retrieved March 17, 2007.

Bibliography

Edmonds, Richard Louis (1985). Northern Frontiers of Qing China and Tokugawa Japan: A Comparative Study of Frontier Policy. University of Chicago, Department of Geography; Research Paper No. 213. ISBN 978-0-89065-118-6.
Elliott, Mark C. (2001). The Manchu Way: The Eight Banners and Ethnic Identity in Late Imperial China. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-4684-7.
Evans, Thammy (2006). Great Wall of China: Beijing & Northern China. Bradt Travel Guide. Bradt Travel Guides. p. 3. ISBN 978-1-84162-158-6.
Haw, Stephen G. (2006). Marco Polo's China: a Venetian in the realm of Khubilai Khan. Volume 3 of Routledge studies in the early history of Asia. Psychology Press. ISBN 978-0-415-34850-8.
Hessler, Peter (2007). "Letter from China: Walking the Wall". The New Yorker. No. May 21, 2007. pp. 58–67.
Karnow, Catherine; Mooney, Paul (2008). National Geographic Traveler: Beijing. National Geographic Books. p. 192. ISBN 978-1-4262-0231-5.
Lindesay, William (2008). The Great Wall Revisited: From the Jade Gate to Old Dragon's Head. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-03149-4.
López-Gil, Norberto (2008). "Is it Really Possible to See the Great Wall of China from Space with a Naked Eye?" (PDF). Journal of Optometry. 1 (1): 3–4. doi:10.3921/joptom.2008.3. ISSN 1989-1342. PMC 3972694. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 10, 2008.
Lovell, Julia (2006). The Great Wall : China against the world 1000 BC – AD 2000. Sydney: Picador Pan Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-330-42241-3.
Rojas, Carlos (2010). The Great Wall : a cultural history. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-04787-7.
Slavicek, Louise Chipley; Mitchell, George J.; Matray, James I. (2005). The Great Wall of China. Infobase Publishing. p. 35. ISBN 978-0-7910-8019-1.
Szabó, József; Dávid, Lóránt; Loczy, Denes, eds. (2010). Anthropogenic Geomorphology: A Guide to Man-made Landforms. Springer. ISBN 978-90-481-3057-3.
Turnbull, Stephen R (January 2007). The Great Wall of China 221 BC–AD 1644. Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84603-004-8.
Waldron, Arthur (1983). "The Problem of The Great Wall of China". Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies. 43 (2): 643–663. doi:10.2307/2719110. JSTOR 2719110.
Waldron, Arthur (1988). "The Great Wall Myth: Its Origins and Role in Modern China". The Yale Journal of Criticism. 2 (1): 67–104.
Waldron, Arthur (1990). The Great Wall of China: from history to myth. Cambridge England New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-42707-4.
Yule, Sir Henry, ed. (1866). Cathay and the way thither: being a collection of medieval notices of China. Issues 36–37 of Works issued by the Hakluyt Society. Printed for the Hakluyt society.

Further reading

Arnold, H. J. P., "The Great Wall: Is It or Isn't It?" Astronomy Now, 1995.
Beckwith, Christopher I. (2009): Empires of the Silk Road: A History of Central Eurasia from the Bronze Age to the Present. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13589-2.
Luo, Zewen, et al. and Baker, David, ed. (1981). The Great Wall. Maidenhead: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK). ISBN 0-07-070745-6
Man, John. (2008). The Great Wall. London: Bantam Press. 335 pages. ISBN 978-0-593-05574-8.
Michaud, Roland and Sabrina (photographers), & Michel Jan, The Great Wall of China. Abbeville Press, 2001. ISBN 0-7892-0736-2
Schafer, Edward H. (1985). The Golden Peaches of Samarkand. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-05462-2.
Yamashita, Michael; Lindesay, William (2007). The Great Wall – From Beginning to End. New York: Sterling. 160 pages. ISBN 978-1-4027-3160-0.

External links

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityTravel information from Wikivoyage

International Friends of the Great Wall Archived February 17, 2009, at the Wayback Machine – organization focused on conservation
UNESCO World Heritage Centre profile
Enthusiast/scholar website (in Chinese)
Great Wall of China on In Our Time at the BBC
Photoset of lesser visited areas of the Great Wall
 Geographic data related to Great Wall of China at OpenStreetMap

vte

Jiayu Pass
Jumenbu
Badaling
Huanghuacheng
Jiankou (Beijing Knot)
Mutianyu
Baimaguan
Gubeikou
Jinshanling
Simatai
Huangya Pass
Shanhai Pass
Hushan

Guangwu (New Guangwu)
Yanmen Pass
Pingxing Pass
Juyong Pass

Niangzi Pass (Hebei/Shanxi border spur)
Miaojiang Great Wall ("Southern Great Wall")

Liaodong
Ji
Xuanfu
Datong
Taiyuan
Yansui
Ningxia
Guyuan
Gansu

Great Wall of Qi

Yumen Pass
Yang Pass

Cloud Platform

Dajingmen

vte

Great Wall of China
Petra
Colosseum
Chichen Itza
Machu Picchu
Taj Mahal
Christ the Redeemer

vte

Dzungarian Gate

Bedel Pass
Irkeshtam Pass
Torugart Pass

Beyik Pass
Kulma Pass
Nezatash Pass

Wakhjir Pass
Tegermansu Pass

Khunjerab Pass
Kilik Pass
Mintaka Pass
Mustagh Pass

Bum La Pass
Cho La
Diphu Pass
Dongkha La
Indira Col
Jelep La
Karakoram Pass
Kepang La
Kongka Pass
Lipulekh Pass
Mana Pass
Nathu La
Rezang La
Shipki La
Spanggur Gap
Tulung La

Korala
Lho La
Nangpa La
South Col

Diphu Pass
Isu Razi Pass

Friendship Pass

Dajingmen
Gubeikou
Jiayu Pass
Huangya Pass
Jingxing Pass
Juyong Pass
Niangzi Pass
Pingxing Pass (Pingxingguan)
Shanhai Pass (Shanhaiguan)
Yang Pass
Yanmen Pass
Yumen Pass

Dasan Pass (Sanguan)
Tong Pass (Tongguan)
Wu Pass

Dehra La
Hindutash
Iron Gate Pass
Kirgizjangal Pass (Heiqia)
Mazar Pass
Muzart Pass
Sanju Pass

Cherko la
Laken La
Lanak La
Lhagba La
Mayum La
North Col
Semo La
Tanggula Pass

Biandukou
Cho La, Sichuan
Hangu Pass
Hulao Pass
Jianmen Pass
Kunlun Pass
Lazikou Pass
Mei Pass

Landforms of China
List of gaps in Hong Kong

vte

Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City
Classical Gardens of Suzhou
Fujian tulou
Lushan
Huangshan
Migratory Bird Sanctuaries along the Coast of Yellow Sea–Bohai Sea of China (Phase I)
Mount Sanqing
Mount Tai
Wuyi Mountains
Temple and Cemetery of Confucius and Kong Family Mansion in Qufu
Xidi, and Hongcun
West Lake
Kulangsu

Ancient Building Complex in the Wudang Mountains
Historic Centre of Macau
Shennongjia
Kaiping Diaolou and Villages
Longmen Grottoes
Historic Monuments of Dengfeng, including the Shaolin Monastery and Gaocheng Observatory
Zuojiang Huashan Rock Art
Wulingyuan
Yinxu

Chengjiang Fossil Site
Dazu Rock Carvings
Fanjingshan
Honghe Hani Rice Terraces
Huanglong
Jiuzhaigou
Lijiang
Mount Emei and Leshan Giant Buddha
Mount Qingcheng and Dujiangyan
Potala Palace, including the Jokhang and Norbulingka
Sichuan Giant Panda Sanctuaries
Three Parallel Rivers

Mount Wutai
Chengde Mountain Resort, including Putuo Zongcheng Temple, Xumi Fushou Temple and Puning Temple
Forbidden City
Zhoukoudian
Ancient City of Pingyao
Summer Palace
Temple of Heaven
Xanadu
Yungang Grottoes
Beijing Central Axis

Koguryo sites
Mukden Palace

Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor
Mogao Caves
Xinjiang Tianshan
Qinghai Hoh Xil

Great Wall
China Danxia
Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties
South China Karst
Grand Canal
Silk Roads
Tusi Sites
Migratory Bird Sanctuaries along the Coast of Yellow Sea–Bohai Sea of China
Badain Jaran Desert

China History

VIAF2

2

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataJapanCzech RepublicIsrael

Structurae

IdRef

First series (1959–64)
Second series (1985–89)
Third series (2002–03)
Fourth series (2019–20)

The Twilight Zone is an American media franchise based on the anthology television series created by Rod Serling in which characters find themselves dealing with often disturbing or unusual events, an experience described as entering "the Twilight Zone". The episodes are in various genres, including science fiction, fantasy, absurdism, dystopian fiction, suspense, horror, supernatural drama, black comedy, and psychological thriller, frequently concluding with a macabre or unexpected twist, and usually with a moral. A popular and critical success, it introduced many Americans to common science fiction and fantasy tropes. The first series, shot entirely in black-and-white, ran on CBS for five seasons from 1959 to 1964.

The Twilight Zone followed in the tradition of earlier television shows such as Tales of Tomorrow (1951–53), Out There (1951–52)  and Science Fiction Theatre (1955–57); radio programs such as  The Weird Circle (1943–45), Dimension X (1950–51) and X Minus One (1955–58); and the radio work of one of Serling's inspirations, Norman Corwin. The success of the series led to a feature film (1983), a TV film (1994), a radio series (2002–12), various literature, theme park attractions and various other spin-offs that spanned five decades, including three revival television series. The second series (1985–89) ran on CBS and in syndication in the 1980s, while the third series ran on UPN (2002–03). The fourth Twilight Zone series, helmed by Jordan Peele, was released on CBS All Access from 2019 to 2020.

TV Guide ranked the original TV series #5 in their 2013 list of the 60 greatest shows of all time and #4 in their list of the 60 greatest dramas.[2][3]

Television history

Background

As a boy, Rod Serling was a fan of pulp fiction stories. As an adult, he sought books with themes such as racism, government, war, society, and human nature in general. Serling decided to combine these interests to broach these subjects on television at a time when they were considered taboo.[4]

Throughout the 1950s, Serling established himself as one of the most popular names in television. He was as famous for writing televised drama as he was for criticizing the medium's limitations. His most vocal complaints concerned censorship, which was frequently practiced by sponsors and networks. "I was not permitted to have my senators discuss any current or pressing problem", he said of his 1957 Studio One production "The Arena", intended to be an involving look into contemporary politics. "To talk of tariff was to align oneself with the Republicans; to talk of labor was to suggest control by the Democrats. To say a single thing germane to the current political scene was absolutely prohibited."

"The Time Element" (1958)

CBS purchased a teleplay in 1958 that writer Rod Serling hoped to produce as the pilot of a weekly anthology series. "The Time Element" marked Serling's first entry in the field of science fiction.

13 years after the end of World War II, a man named Peter Jenson (William Bendix) visits a psychoanalyst, Dr. Gillespie (Martin Balsam). Jenson tells him about a recurring dream in which he tries to warn people about the "sneak attack" on Pearl Harbor before it happens, but the warnings are disregarded. Jenson believes the dream's events are real and travels back to 1941 each night. Dr. Gillespie insists that time travel is impossible given the nature of temporal paradoxes. While on the couch, Jenson falls asleep once again, but this time dreams that the Japanese planes shoot and kill him. In Dr. Gillespie's office, the couch on which Jenson was lying is now empty. Dr. Gillespie goes to a bar where he finds Jenson's picture on the wall. The bartender tells him that Jenson had tended bar there, but he was killed during the Pearl Harbor attack.

With the "Time Element" script, Serling drafted the fundamental elements that defined the subsequent series: a science-fiction/fantasy theme, opening and closing narration, and an ending with a twist. "The Time Element" was purchased immediately but shelved indefinitely.

This is where things stood when Bert Granet, the new producer for Westinghouse Desilu Playhouse, discovered "The Time Element" in CBS' vaults while searching for an original Serling script to add prestige to his show. "The Time Element" (introduced by Desi Arnaz) debuted on November 24, 1958, to an overwhelmingly delighted audience of television viewers and critics alike. "The humor and sincerity of Mr. Serling's dialogue made 'The Time Element' consistently entertaining," offered Jack Gould of The New York Times. More than 6,000 letters of praise flooded Granet's offices. Convinced that a series based on such stories could succeed, CBS again began talks with Serling about the possibilities of producing The Twilight Zone. "Where Is Everybody?" was accepted as the pilot episode and the project was officially announced to the public in early 1959. Other than reruns at the time, "The Time Element" was not aired on television again until it was shown as part of a 1996 all-night sneak preview of the new cable channel TVLand. It is available in an Italian DVD boxed set titled Ai confini della realtà – I tesori perduti. The Twilight Zone Season 1 Blu-ray boxed set released on September 14, 2010, offers a remastered high-definition version of the original Desilu Playhouse production as a special feature.[5] The program's supporting cast features Darryl Hickman, Jesse White, Bartlett Robinson and future Three Stooges member Joe DeRita.

First series (1959–1964)

The series was produced by Cayuga Productions, Inc., a production company owned and named by Serling. It reflects his background in Central New York State and is named after Cayuga Lake, on which he owned a home, and where Cornell University and Ithaca College are located.

Aside from Serling, who wrote or adapted nearly two-thirds of the series' total episodes, writers for The Twilight Zone included leading authors such as Charles Beaumont, Ray Bradbury,[6] Earl Hamner, Jr., George Clayton Johnson, Richard Matheson, Reginald Rose, and Jerry Sohl. Many episodes also featured new adaptations of classic stories by such writers as Ambrose Bierce, Jerome Bixby, Damon Knight, John Collier, and Lewis Padgett.

Twilight Zone's writers frequently used science fiction as a vehicle for social comment, as networks and sponsors who censored controversial material from live dramas were less concerned with seemingly innocuous fantasy and sci-fi stories. Frequent themes on The Twilight Zone included nuclear war, McCarthyism, and mass hysteria, subjects that were avoided on less serious primetime television. Episodes such as "The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street" and "I Am the Night—Color Me Black" offered specific commentary on current events and social issues. Other stories, such as "The Masks", "I Dream of Genie", or "Mr. Denton on Doomsday" were allegories, parables, or fables that reflected the moral and philosophical choices of the characters.

Despite his esteem in the writing community, Serling found the series difficult to sell. Few critics felt that science fiction could transcend empty escapism and enter the realm of adult drama. In a September 22, 1959, interview with Serling, Mike Wallace asked a question illustrative of the times: "...[Y]ou're going to be, obviously, working so hard on The Twilight Zone that, in essence, for the time being and for the foreseeable future, you've given up on writing anything important for television, right?" While Serling's appearances on the show became one of its most distinctive features, with his clipped delivery still widely imitated today, he was reportedly nervous about it and had to be persuaded to appear on camera. Serling often appeared in medias res with the characters remaining oblivious to him, with one notable exception: In "A World of His Own", a writer (Keenan Wynn) with the ability to make characters appear and disappear objects to Serling's narration and promptly erases Serling from the show.

In season two, due to budgetary constraints, the network decided – against Serling's wishes – to cut costs by shooting some episodes on videotape rather than film. The requisite multicamera setup of the videotape format precluded location shooting, severely limiting the potential scope of the storylines, and the experiment was abandoned after just six episodes ("Twenty Two", "Static", "The Whole Truth", "The Lateness of the Hour", "The Night of the Meek", and "Long Distance Call").

The first series contains 156 episodes. The episodes in seasons one through three are 30 minutes long with commercials (24 or 25 minutes without commercials). Season four (1962–63) consists of one-hour episodes with commercials (51 minutes without commercials). Season five returned to the half-hour format.[7]

Second series (1985–1989)

It was Serling's decision to sell his share of the series back to the network that eventually allowed for a Twilight Zone revival. As an in-house production, CBS stood to earn more money producing The Twilight Zone than it could by purchasing a new series produced by an outside company. Even so, the network was slow to consider a revival, turning down offers from the original production team of Rod Serling and Buck Houghton and later from American filmmaker Francis Ford Coppola.

CBS gave the new Twilight Zone a greenlight in 1984 under the supervision of Carla Singer, then Vice President of Drama Development. While the show did not come close to matching the enduring popularity of the original, some episodes – particularly Alan Brennert's love story "Her Pilgrim Soul" and J. Neil Schulman's "Profile in Silver" [8][9] – were critically acclaimed. In a tribute to the first series, the opening credits include a brief image of Rod Serling. Four episodes are remakes of those from the first series: "Night of the Meek", "Shadow Play", "The After Hours" and "A Game of Pool", while "Dead Woman's Shoes" is an adaptation of "Dead Man's Shoes". Unlike the first, third and fourth series, this version does not include the opening monologue during the title sequence. As well, the narration is all strictly voice-over and the narrator never appears on-screen.

Rod Serling's Lost Classics (1994)

In the early 1990s, Richard Matheson and Carol Serling produced an outline for a two-hour made-for-TV movie which would feature Matheson adaptations of three yet-unfilmed Rod Serling short stories. Outlines for such a production were rejected by CBS until early 1994, when Serling's widow discovered a complete shooting script ("Where the Dead Are") authored by her late husband, while rummaging through their garage. She showed the forgotten script to producers Michael O'Hara and Laurence Horowitz, who were significantly impressed by it. "I had a pile of scripts, which I usually procrastinate about reading. But I read this one right away and, after 30 pages, called my partner and said, "I love it," recalled O'Hara. "This is pure imagination, a period piece, literate – some might say wordy. If Rod Serling's name weren't on it, it wouldn't have a chance at getting made."

Eager to capitalize on Serling's celebrity status as a writer, CBS packaged "Where the Dead Are" with Matheson's adaptation of "The Theatre", debuting as a two-hour feature on the night of May 19, 1994, under the name Twilight Zone: Rod Serling's Lost Classics. The title represents a misnomer, as both stories were conceived long after Twilight Zone's cancellation. Written just months before Serling's death, "Where the Dead Are" starred Patrick Bergin as a 19th-century doctor who stumbles upon a mad scientist's medical experiments with immortality. "The Theatre" starred Amy Irving and Gary Cole as a couple who visits a cineplex where they discover the feature presentation depicts their own lives. James Earl Jones provided opening and closing narrations.

Critical response was mixed. Gannett News Service described it as "taut and stylish, a reminder of what can happen when fine actors are given great words." USA Today was less impressed, even suggesting that Carol Serling "should have left these two unproduced mediocrities in the garage where she found them." Ultimately, ratings proved insufficient to justify a proposed sequel featuring three scripts adapted by Matheson.

Third series (2002–2003)

A third series was developed by UPN in 2002; it was hosted by Forest Whitaker. It was broadcast in a one-hour format composed of two half-hour stories, it was canceled after one season. "It's Still a Good Life" is a sequel to "It's a Good Life", "The Monsters Are on Maple Street" is an adaptation of "The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street" and "Eye of the Beholder" is a remake of an episode from the first series, with Serling still credited as writer.

Fourth series (2019–2020)

In December 2012, it was reported that Bryan Singer was developing and executive producing a fourth television series for CBS Television Studios. A writer for the series was not chosen and the program was not pitched to any networks. CBS, which broadcast the first series and second series, was reportedly interested.[10][11][12][13][14] In February 2013, Singer told TG Daily that the project was still in development and that he hoped to direct the pilot and have A-list actors appear on the revival.[15] The following month, he told IGN that a writer with whom he had previously worked was in negotiations to join the revival and that he felt "passionate" towards the first series and the planned revival.[16]

In February 2016, it was reported that Ken Levine would write and direct the pilot episode of the revival series. It was also reported that the series would be interactive.[17][18] In November 2017, it was reported that Jordan Peele was developing a reboot of the series for streaming service CBS All Access with Marco Ramirez serving as potential showrunner.[19] In December 2017, CBS All Access ordered the fourth The Twilight Zone series to series. It was announced that the series would be produced by CBS Television Studios in association with Monkeypaw Productions and Genre Films. Jordan Peele, Marco Ramirez, and Simon Kinberg will serve as executive producers for the series and collaborate on the premiere episode. Win Rosenfeld and Audrey Chon will also serve as executive producers.[20] Peele was revealed to be the new host and narrator in September 2018, and the new opening sequence was released. The series premiered on April 1, 2019.[21]

The season 1 episode "Nightmare at 30,000 Feet" is based on the first series' season 5 episode "Nightmare at 20,000 Feet".[22] The season 2 episode "You Might Also Like" features the Kanamits, who first appeared in the first series' season 3 episode "To Serve Man".[23] On February 24, 2021, CBS All Access canceled the series after two seasons.[24]

Other media

Film

Twilight Zone: The Movie is a 1983 feature film produced by Steven Spielberg and John Landis. It starred Dan Aykroyd, Albert Brooks, John Lithgow, Vic Morrow and Scatman Crothers. The film remade three classic episodes of the first series and included one original story. Landis directed the prologue and the first segment "(Time Out"), Spielberg directed the second (Kick the Can), Joe Dante the third (It's a Good Life", and George Miller directed the fourth (Nightmare at 20,000 Feet). Landis's segment became notorious for a helicopter accident during filming that caused the deaths of Morrow and two child actors.

Actor Leonardo DiCaprio is planning to make a new film with Warner Bros., citing The Twilight Zone as his favorite TV series. Unlike the first film, which was an anthology feature, it will be a big-budget, SFX-laden continuous story possibly based on classic episodes of the series such as "Eye of the Beholder", "To Serve Man", or any of the 92 scripts written by Rod Serling, to which Warner Bros. owns the rights.[25][26][27][28][29] One plot leaked from the script tells about a pilot who time-travels 96 years into the future.[30] Cloverfield director Matt Reeves was signed in 2011 to direct the movie, but left in 2012 to direct Dawn of the Planet of the Apes.[31] On August 16, 2013, Joseph Kosinski was announced to direct.[32] The studio hired Aron Eli Coleite to pen the screenplay for the film and will not be an anthology but use various elements from the Twilight Zone universe.[33] In June 2017, Christine Lavaf was hired to write the script.[34]

Games

In 1964, Ideal released a board game, The Twilight Zone Game, at the height of the show's popularity. The game consisted of a cardboard playing surface, four colored playing pieces, a colored spinning wheel, and 12 "door" playing cards.[35] In 1988, Gigabit Systems, Inc. published a text adventure video game for Amiga and the PC.[36] In March 1992, Midway Games released a wide-body pinball game, Twilight Zone, based on the original TV series, as a Bally title. Conceived by Pat Lawlor, it uses Golden Earring's hit song "Twilight Zone" (1982) as its theme song. The game sold 15,235 units.[37] It is often regarded as one of the greatest pinball machines of all time.[38]  On September 17, 2014, Legacy Interactive and Spark Plug Games released a casual adventure game based on The Twilight Zone.[39] On July 14, 2022, Fun Train and Pocket Money Games released a Virtual Reality game based on The Twilight Zone for Meta Quest 2 titled Twilight Zone VR.[40]

Literature

Serling novelized several of his original scripts, which were published in the anthologies Stories from the Twilight Zone (1960), More Stories from the Twilight Zone (1961) and New Stories from the Twilight Zone (1962); these have all been reprinted several times, including in an omnibus, The Twilight Zone: Complete Stories (1980). In 1995, DAW Books published the anthology books Journeys to the Twilight Zone (16 stories edited by Carol Serling including Rod Serling's "Suggestion"), Return to the Twilight Zone (18 stories edited by Carol Serling including Rod Serling's "The Sole Survivor"), and Adventures in the Twilight Zone (24 stories edited by Carol Serling including Rod Serling's "Lindemann's Catch"). In September 2009, Tor Books published Twilight Zone: 19 Original Stories on the 50th Anniversary, to mark the 50th anniversary of the series. It contains stories by 20 authors such as R. L. Stine and Timothy Zahn, and an introduction by Carol Serling.

Western Publishing published a Twilight Zone comic book, first providing content under contract to publisher Dell Comics for four issues, one in 1961 and three further issues in 1962, with the first two published as part of their long-running Four Color anthology series as issue numbers 1173 and 1288, and then two further one-shots numbered separately in Dell's unique fashion as 01-860-207 and 12-860-210 (numbered as 01-860-210 on the inside) respectively. Western then restarted the series under its own Gold Key imprint with a formal issue No. 1, which ran 92 issues from 1962 to 1979, with the final issue being published in 1982. Several of the stories were reprinted in their Mystery Comics Digest, which mentioned the title on the covers. A wide range of artists worked on the title, including Jack Sparling, Reed Crandall, Lee Elias, George Evans, Russ Jones, Joe Orlando, Jerry Robinson, Mike Sekowsky, Dan Spiegle, Frank Thorne, and Alex Toth. The first published comic book work of artist Frank Miller appeared in issue 84 (June 1978).[41] In 1990, NOW Comics published a single issue of a new series using the title logo from the 1985 revival, featuring an adaptation of Harlan Ellison's story "Crazy as a Soup Sandwich". The issue was reprinted as Twilight Zones Premiere in 1991, followed by an eleven-issue second volume (1991–1992) and a four-issue third volume (1993), as well as an annual and a 3-D special in 1993.

In 2008, students at the Savannah College of Art and Design partnered with Walker & Co. to create graphic novels based on eight episodes of the series through 2009. The first four, "Walking Distance", "The After Hours", "The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street", and "The Odyssey of Flight 33", were released in December 2011. The other four were "The Midnight Sun", "Deaths-Head Revisited", "The Big Tall Wish" and "Will the Real Martian Please Stand Up?"[42] Comics publisher Dynamite Entertainment ran a multiple-issue series, written by J. Michael Straczynski and with art by Guiu Vilanova, beginning in December 2013.

Music

Marius Constant composed the theme used for the series from the second season onward.[43] This replaced Bernard Herrmann's theme for the first season, though Constant's theme is more associated with the recognizable sound of The Twilight Zone and most of its incarnations. The guitar part was performed by jazz guitarist and session musician Howard Roberts on a 1952 Fender Telecaster.[44] Other music contributors for the original television show are Jerry Goldsmith, Leonard Rosenman, Nathan Scott, Fred Steiner, Nathan Van Cleave, René Garriguenc and Franz Waxman.[45]
The Grateful Dead performed the theme for the 1985 revival series.
Jonathan Davis of Korn composed the theme music for the 2002 revival series.
Marco Beltrami and Brandon Roberts composed the music for the 2019 revival.

Jerry Goldsmith composed the music for Twilight Zone: The Movie (1983).

Michael Jackson used samples from The Twilight Zone in his songs "The Lost Children" and "Threatened" from the 2001 album Invincible.

The Marketts' biggest hit, "Out of Limits",[46] originally entitled "Outer Limits", was named after the 1963 TV series The Outer Limits. Rod Serling sued the Marketts for quoting the four-note motif from The Twilight Zone, without his approval, which resulted in the change of the title to "Out of Limits".[47] It reached number 3 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in 1964. It sold over one million copies, and was awarded a gold disc.[48]

Many other musicians have written and performed music based on The Twilight Zone, including: 2 Unlimited ("Twilight Zone"), Anthrax ("Intro to Reality"), Average White Band,[49] John Cale,[50] Dr. John,[51] David Dubowski ("To Serve Man"), Golden Earring ("Twilight Zone"), Michael Hurley,[52] Tech N9ne, Iron Maiden ("Twilight Zone"), Mekong Delta ("Twilight Zone"), Van Morrison ("Twilight Zone"), Rush ("The Twilight Zone"),[53] Raymond Scott, Sly & Robbie, Magneto Dayo, The Manhattan Transfer ("Twilight Zone/Twilight Tone"), The Residents, The Ventures ("Twilight Zone"), Panic! at the Disco[54] and John Williams.

Radio

Beginning in 2002, episodes of the original The Twilight Zone were adapted for radio, with Stacy Keach taking Serling's role as narrator and produced by Carl Amari of Falcon Picture Group. Each episode features a current Hollywood celebrity, including Jason Alexander, Blair Underwood, Lou Gossett, Jr., Michael York, Jim Caviezel, Jane Seymour, Don Johnson, Sean Astin, Luke Perry and others in the title roles. The series is broadcast on hundreds of radio stations from coast to coast and over Sirius/XM. The station list and episodes for download, including 3 Free episodes are available at the official website at www.twilightzoneradio.com

Scripts

Beginning in 2001, Gauntlet Press began publishing collections of original scripts from The Twilight Zone by Charles Beaumont, Richard Matheson, and Rod Serling. A ten-volume signed, limited edition series of all 92 of Rod Serling's scripts, authorized by his wife, Carol Serling, began yearly publication in 2004. Many of the scripts contain handwritten edits by Serling himself and differ in significant ways from the aired versions; most volumes contain an alternate version of a selected script. The script for "The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street" has been published into 7th grade reading books in the form of a play.

Stage productions

Live theatre productions of the original episodes can be seen in Los Angeles and Seattle, where Theater Schmeater has continuously produced a late-night series, "The Twilight Zone – Live" with permission of the Serling estate, since 1996. In 2009, Masquerade, A Chennai based theater group produced 'Dystopia', loosely based on the episodes "The Obsolete Man" and "Five Characters in Search of an Exit".[55] In 2011, the Penn State University theatre group, No Refund Theatre, produced a stage adaptation of The Twilight Zone. It included the episodes "The Eye of the Beholder", "The Midnight Sun", and "Nothing in the Dark". It was directed by Anthony Arbaiza.

In 2017, Bethesda-Chevy Chase High School produced a live adaptation directed by Adam Graham with permission from CBS, with two shows containing four episodes each. These episodes included "Will The Real Martian Please Stand Up?" and "The Monsters Are Due On Maple Street." as well as more technically challenging episodes such as "Penny For Your Thoughts" and "The Eye of the Beholder."

In December 2017 the Almeida Theatre in London are staging the World Premiere production of 'The Twilight Zone'. Adapted by Anne Washburn and directed by Laurence Olivier Award winner Richard Jones, and will be based on stories from the first series by Rod Serling, Charles Beaumont and Richard Matheson.

Theme park attraction

The Twilight Zone Tower of Terror is a theme park attraction based on the original Twilight Zone series. Designed by Walt Disney Imagineering, the attraction is present at Disney's Hollywood Studios in Orlando, Walt Disney Studios Park in Paris and Tokyo DisneySea in Japan. A fourth attraction at Disney California Adventure operated from 2004 to 2017 before being re-themed to Guardians of the Galaxy – Mission: Breakout!. The attraction in Japan is the only one not themed to The Twilight Zone, due to cultural differences and constraints in licensing for the Oriental Land Company, owner and operator of the Tokyo parks. The ride also served as the inspiration for the 1997 TV film Tower of Terror, which bears no connection to The Twilight Zone.

Syndication

The Twilight Zone first series is currently in syndication on MeTV Network[56] and Syfy, and the 2002 revival is syndicated on the El Rey Network.

In popular culture

In Matt Groening's Futurama, there is a dystopian TV show called The Scary Door, the title sequence, dystopian themes and comedic premise of which are heavily influenced by The Twilight Zone. One episode of The Scary Door, "The Last Man On Earth," parodies The Twilight Zone's original season 1 episode "Time Enough At Last."[57][58]

Many Treehouse Of Horror episodes of The Simpsons also reference the show. These include "Treehouse of Horror" (where the family are abducted by aliens, "Hungry Are The Damned"), "Treehouse of Horror III" (which features an evil Krusty The Clown doll, "Clown Without Pity") and "Treehouse of Horror IV" (where Bart sees a gremlin on the side of the school bus, "Terror at 5 1/2 Feet"). Homer also references the show in the "Homer3" segment of "Treehouse of Horror VI," when, upon entering the 3rd dimension, he says "It's like something out of that twilighty show about that zone".[59][60][61][62][63]

The X-Files character Robert Matheson is named after one of the original series' writers.[59]

In Mad Men, Paul Kinsey quotes Rod Serling's "submitted for your approval" opening and foreshadows the original show's cancellation (Season 1, Episode 2), saying "Mitch in Media says CBS might pull the plug -- I'll kill myself."[59]

The Late Show with Stephen Colbert aired a skit The Twilight Zone: Just The Twists on February 1, 2016 and on January 22, 2024, where the host claims to get access to unreleased alternative versions of episodes.[64][65]

The video game Alan Wake contains an in-universe series called Night Springs, episodes of which the player can find on televisions scattered through the game. The episodes mirror The Twilight Zone's intro, theme song, and storytelling style, complete with an announcer impersonating Rod Serling's voice and narration.[66][67]

Many bands and artists have released songs dedicated to the show, with some titled "The Twilight Zone"/"Twilight Zone", as listed above. John Grant briefly mentions the show's title in the song "Sigourney Weaver", from his 2010 album, Queen of Denmark. British post-punk band The Fall released a song called "Time Enough At Last" appearing on their Code: Selfish album. The song recounts the events of the original Twilight Zone episode of the same name and also appears on the band's 2003 compilation album of the same name. Mathcore duo Serling is named after the shows creator, Rod Serling. All songs, lyrics, and albums of theirs discuss particular Twilight Zone episodes and themes.[68][69][70]

See also

Speculative fiction/Horror portalTelevision portalUnited States portal

Science fiction on television

13 Demon Street
Alcoa Presents: One Step Beyond
Alfred Hitchcock Presents
The New Alfred Hitchcock Presents
Amazing Stories
Are You Afraid of the Dark?
Black Mirror
Creepshow
Freddy's Nightmares
Fringe
Goosebumps
Grizzly Tales for Gruesome Kids
Hammer House of Horror
Hammer House of Mystery and Suspense
La hora marcada
Inside No. 9
Into the Dark
Just Beyond
Masters of Science Fiction
Monsters
Night Gallery
Night Visions
Round the Twist
Science Fiction Theatre
The Outer Limits (1963 TV series)
The Outer Limits (1995 TV series)
The Simpsons: Treehouse of Horror
Tales from the Crypt
Tales from the Darkside
Tales of Tomorrow
The Ray Bradbury Theater
The Veil
Thriller (American TV series)
Thriller (British TV series)
Twin Peaks
Ultra Q
'Way Out
The X-Files

References

^ Tommasini, Anthony (June 5, 2009). "A Composer Best Known for a Creepy TV Tune". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 4, 2014. Retrieved April 28, 2013.

^ "TV Guide Magazine's 60 Best Series of All Time". tvguide.com. December 23, 2013. Archived from the original on October 3, 2016. Retrieved October 10, 2017.

^ Roush, Matt (February 25, 2013). "Showstoppers: The 60 Greatest Dramas of All Time". TV Guide. pp. 16–17.

^ LaFrance, Adrienne. "How The Twilight Zone Predicted Our Paranoid Present". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved August 11, 2017.

^ "The Twilight Zone DVD news: Official Season 1 Press Release". TVShowsOnDVD.com. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. Retrieved April 2, 2013.

^ "8 Bizarre Facts About Rod Serling and The Twilight Zone". October 8, 2014. Archived from the original on August 8, 2017. Retrieved August 11, 2017.

^ "The Twilight Zone". IMDb.com. October 2, 1959. Retrieved November 15, 2019.

^ ""The Twilight Zone" Profile in Silver/Button, Button (TV Episode 1986)". IMDb.com.[unreliable source?]

^ ""The Twilight Zone" Profile in Silver/Button, Button (TV Episode 1986)". IMDb.com.[unreliable source?]

^ "Bryan Singer To Spearhead 'Twilight Zone' Series Reboot For CBS TV Studios". Deadline. December 19, 2012. Archived from the original on December 31, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2012.

^ "Singer leads Twilight Zone reboot". December 20, 2012. Archived from the original on February 18, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2012.

^ "Bryan Singer Developing New TV Version of The Twilight Zone". IGN. December 19, 2012. Archived from the original on December 22, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2012.

^ "X-Men's' Bryan Singer Prepping 'Twilight Zone' Reboot". December 19, 2012. Archived from the original on December 31, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2012.

^ "Bryan Singer Developing New 'Twilight Zone' Series For CBS". December 19, 2012. Archived from the original on December 23, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2012.

^ "Bryan Singer Hoping for an A-list cast for his Twilight Zone show". Total Film. Future Publishing Limited. Archived from the original on August 25, 2013. Retrieved August 29, 2013.

^ Cornet, Roth. "What's Happening with Bryan Singer's Planned Twilight Zone Series Reboot?". Archived from the original on July 15, 2013. Retrieved August 29, 2013.

^ Plaugic, Lizzie (April 18, 2016). "CBS's new Twilight Zone reboot will be a cross between a game and a movie". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 31, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016.

^ Kohler, Chris (April 18, 2016). "BioShock Director Ken Levine's Next Stop? An Interactive Twilight Zone Movie". WIRED. Archived from the original on November 3, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016.

^ Holloway, Daniel; Steinberg, Brian (November 2, 2017). "CBS Will Revive 'Twilight Zone' on All Access Streaming Service". Variety. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2017.

^ Andreeva, Nellie (December 6, 2017). "'The Twilight Zone': Jordan Peele, Simon Kinberg & Marco Ramirez Board Reboot On CBS All Access". Deadline. Archived from the original on December 7, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2017.

^ Nemetz, Dave (September 20, 2018). "Jordan Peele to Host and Narrate Twilight Zone Revival at CBS All Access — Watch the New Opening Now". TVLine. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved September 20, 2018.

^ Hibberd, James (October 26, 2018). "Twilight Zone reboot casts Adam Scott in remake of iconic episode". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 26, 2018. Retrieved October 26, 2018.

^ Bell, Amanda (June 23, 2020). "The Twilight Zone Brings Back Classic Aliens From 'To Serve Man' in This Exclusive Season 2 First Look". TV Guide. Retrieved June 24, 2020.

^ Haring, Bruce (February 24, 2021). "'The Twilight Zone' Reboot Canceled By CBS All Access After 2 Seasons". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 24, 2021.

^ Siebalt, Joshua (July 25, 2008). "DiCaprio Behind Another Twilight Zone". Dread Central. Archived from the original on August 1, 2008. Retrieved July 25, 2008.

^ Reynolds, Simon (July 25, 2008). "DiCaprio eyes 'Twilight Zone' remake". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 1, 2009. Retrieved July 25, 2008.

^ Zeitchik, Steven (July 25, 2008). "Leonardo DiCaprio eyes the 'Zone'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 3, 2008. Retrieved July 25, 2008.

^ "DiCaprio eyeing Twilight Zone remake". OneIndia. July 26, 2008. Archived from the original on July 13, 2012. Retrieved July 28, 2008.

^ "Leonardo DiCaprio eyeing Twilight Zone remake". July 25, 2008. Archived from the original on August 4, 2008. Retrieved July 28, 2008.

^ "Plot Description For The Twilight Zone Movie Revealed". cinemablend. November 2, 2012. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2012.

^ "Matt Reeves exits The Twilight Zone movie". Den of Geek. September 26, 2012. Archived from the original on October 20, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2013.

^ "'Tron' Helmer Joseph Kosinski to Direct 'Twilight Zone' Film (Exclusive)". hollywoodreporter.com. August 16, 2013. Archived from the original on August 18, 2013. Retrieved August 16, 2013.

^ McNary, Dave (August 24, 2013). "'Twilight Zone' Movie Gaining Momentum At Warner Bros. (EXCLUSIVE)". variety.com. Archived from the original on September 30, 2017. Retrieved December 9, 2017.

^ McNary, Dave (June 20, 2017). "'Twilight Zone' Movie Finds Writer in Christine Lavaf (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 20, 2017. Retrieved June 21, 2017.

^ "Twilight Zone board game". Board Game Geek. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2011.

^ "Twilight Zone", Gigabit Systems Inc, 1988, archived from the original on November 15, 2018, retrieved May 27, 2017

^ "Internet Pinball Database listing for Twilight Zone". Archived from the original on April 15, 2017. Retrieved May 4, 2017.

^ "Top 300 Rated Internet Pinball Database Pinball Machines". Archived from the original on April 23, 2021.

^ "Information about the upcoming Twilight Zone Game". The Twilight Zone Game. November 17, 2014. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014.

^ "The Twilight Zone VR - The Twilight Zone returns, coming to VR headsets in July 2022!". The Twilight Zone VR. Retrieved December 7, 2022.

^ "GCD :: Issue :: The Twilight Zone #84". Comics.org. Archived from the original on February 16, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2019.

^ Greenberger, Robert (December 28, 2008). "Review: 'Twilight Zone' Graphic Novels". ComicMix. Archived from the original on January 1, 2009. Retrieved January 6, 2009.

^ Dessem, Matthew (April 8, 2019). "A Brief History of the Theme From The Twilight Zone: From the Grateful Dead to KoЯn, each new version of the Twilight Zone theme was more terrifying than the last". Slate.

^ "TV Theme Songs". The Howard Roberts Project. Archived from the original on January 18, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2019.

^ "The Twilight Zone Tribute". American Music Preservation. Archived from the original on April 1, 2013. Retrieved September 13, 2009.

^ "Out of Limits". Repertoire.bmi.com. Archived from the original on November 24, 2006. Retrieved November 10, 2012.,

^ Uslan, Michael; Clark, Dick; Solomon, Bruce (1981). Dick Clark's the First 25 Years of Rock & Roll. Dell Publishing Company. ISBN 9780440517634. twilight zone.

^ Murrells, Joseph (1978). The Book of Golden Discs (2nd ed.). London: Barrie and Jenkins Ltd. p. 163. ISBN 0-214-20512-6.

^ "Show Your Hand - Average White Band". allmusic.com. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2017.

^ "John Cale - "Twilight Zone" lyrics". themusic-world.com. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2017.

^ Gancher, David (May 31, 1969). "Dr. John: Babylon Review". rollingstone.com. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2017.

^ "Michael Hurley - Hi Fi Snock Uptown". lightintheattic.net. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2017.

^ Grow, Kory (March 29, 2016). "Rush's Alex Lifeson on '2112': 'It Was Our Protest Album'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 17, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016.

^ Lockhart, Bri (May 11, 2016). "Panic! at the Disco gets weird in "Don't Threaten Me With a Good Time"". theyoungfolks.com. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2017.

^ "Play time, folks!". The Hindu. Chennai, India. September 2, 2009. Archived from the original on April 13, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2010.

^ MeTV Network Schedule http://metv.com/shows/ Archived June 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine

^ Futurama - Scary Door, Twilight Zone. Futurama & Simpsons Freak. September 8, 2012. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved October 2, 2021 – via YouTube.

^ Futurama -The Scary Door compilation. Renato Pepe. August 29, 2016. Archived from the original on April 26, 2021. Retrieved October 2, 2021 – via YouTube.

^ a b c "Top ten Twilight Zone references in pop culture".

^ The Simpsons: Homer buys a cursed Doll. Cartoon Guy. June 6, 2018. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved October 2, 2021 – via YouTube.

^ Treehouse of horror IV: Terror at 5 1/2 feet part 2/2. Özgür Arslan. January 6, 2018. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved October 2, 2021 – via YouTube.

^ The Simpsons - Hungry are the Damned. Bart Zombie. February 20, 2018. Archived from the original on September 25, 2021. Retrieved October 2, 2021 – via YouTube.

^ The Simpsons - Homer 3D. Bart Zombie. February 23, 2018. Archived from the original on December 5, 2020. Retrieved October 2, 2021 – via YouTube.

^ Twilight Zone: Just The Twists on YouTube

^ The Late Show Presents: "The Twilight Zone: Just The Twists" on YouTube

^ de Matos, Xav (March 20, 2012). "Alan Wake's Night Springs: The Complete Series - 'Family Occasion'". Engadget. Retrieved December 24, 2022.

^ Latour, Jamie (October 28, 2021). "Alan Wake Remastered: All TV Show Locations". TheGamer. Retrieved December 24, 2022.

^ "The fall time enough at last songs - Google Search". Google.com. Retrieved June 10, 2022.

^ Edwards, Robin (October 21, 2011). "Top ten Twilight Zone references in pop culture". Westword. Archived from the original on November 23, 2020. Retrieved October 2, 2021.

^ "Serling". Spotify. Retrieved August 27, 2022.

Bibliography

Albarella, Tony, ed. As Timeless as Infinity: The Complete Twilight Zone Scripts of Rod Serling. Colorado Springs, CO: Gauntlet Press.
*Vol. 1 (2004). ISBN 978-1-887368-71-1.
*Vol. 2 (2005). ISBN 978-1-887368-76-6.
*Vol. 3 (2006). ISBN 978-1-887368-82-7.
*Vol. 4 (2007). ISBN 978-1-887368-92-6.
*Vol. 5 (2008). ISBN 978-1-934267-00-4.
*Vol. 6 (2009). ISBN 978-1-934267-06-6.
*Vol. 7 (2010). ISBN 978-1-934267-15-8.
Anker, Roger, ed. (2004). The Twilight Zone Scripts of Charles Beaumont, Vol. 1. Colorado Springs, CO: Gauntlet Press. ISBN 978-1-887368-73-5.
DeVoe, Bill. (2008). Trivia from The Twilight Zone. Albany, GA: Bear Manor Media. ISBN 978-1-59393-136-0.
Grams, Martin. (2008). The Twilight Zone: Unlocking the Door to a Television Classic. Churchville, MD: OTR Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9703310-9-0.
Presnell, Don and Marty McGee. (2008). A Critical History of Television's The Twilight Zone, 1959–1964. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-3886-0
Stanyard, Stewart T. (2007). Dimensions Behind the Twilight Zone: A Backstage Tribute to Television's Groundbreaking Series. Ecw Press. ISBN 978-1-55022-744-4.
Wiater, Stanley, ed. (2001). Richard Matheson's The Twilight Zone Scripts, Vol. 1. Colorado Springs, CO: Gauntlet Press. ISBN 978-1-887368-42-1.
Wiater, Stanley, ed. (2002). Richard Matheson's The Twilight Zone Scripts, Vol. 2. Colorado Springs, CO: Gauntlet Press. ISBN 978-1-887368-52-0.
Zicree, Marc Scott (1982). The Twilight Zone Companion. First Edition, Bantam Books. ISBN 978-0-553-01416-7. Second Edition (1992). Silman-James Press; ISBN 978-1-879505-09-4.

External links

The Twilight Zone at IMDb first series
The Twilight Zone at IMDb second series
The Twilight Zone at IMDb third series
The Twilight Zone at IMDb fourth series
Encyclopedia of Television
Twilight Zone Scifi.com Page
The Twilight Zone Revisited
Fan Site
The Twilight Zone first series at CVTA
The Twilight Zone second series at CVTA
Twilight Zone actors interviewed, October, 2015

vte

First series (1959–1964)
episodes
season 1
2
3
4
5
guest stars
Second series (1985–1989)
episodes
Third series (2002–03)
"It's Still a Good Life"
"Eye of the Beholder"
Fourth series (2019–20)
"The Comedian"

episodes
season 1
2
3
4
5
guest stars

season 1
2
3
4
5

episodes

"It's Still a Good Life"
"Eye of the Beholder"

"The Comedian"

Twilight Zone: The Movie (1983)
"Nights Are Forever"
1982 helicopter accident
Rod Serling's Lost Classics (1994)

"Nights Are Forever"
1982 helicopter accident

19 Original Stories on the 50th Anniversary

Radio series
Pinball machine
Tower of Terror attraction
1997 film

1997 film

Rod Serling
Burgess Meredith
Charles Aidman
Robin Ward
James Earl Jones
Forest Whitaker
Jordan Peele

Night Gallery
pilot film
episodes
Golden Earring song
Rush song
Newton N. Minow (Vast Wasteland speech)

pilot film
episodes

Category

vte

Anchorman
The Bad News Bears
Beverly Hills Cop
Cloverfield
Crocodile Dundee
The Crow
Children of the Corn
Death Wish
Dungeons & Dragons
Friday the 13th
G.I. Joe
The Godfather
Indiana Jones ¶
Jack Ryan
Meet the Parents
Mission: Impossible
The Naked Gun
Grease
The Saint
The Nutty Professor
Paranormal Activity
A Quiet Place
The Ring
Scream
Sonic the Hedgehog
Smile
Star Trek
films
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles films
Terminator
Top Gun
Transformers
Watchmen #

films

The Amazing Race
CSI
The Late Show
Lenkov-verse
NCIS
The Twilight Zone

Beavis and Butt-Head
Jackass
South Park
Teen Wolf

Avatar: The Last Airbender
Barnyard (series)
Dangerverse
Fred
Dora the Explorer
The Fairly OddParents (films)
The Loud House
Jimmy Neutron §
Rugrats § (films)
SpongeBob SquarePants § (films)
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles§
Winx Club

§ Shared with Paramount Pictures
¶ Shared with Lucasfilm
# Shared with Warner Bros.
 Category

Renaissance art (1350 – 1620[1]) is the painting, sculpture, and decorative arts of the period of European history known as the Renaissance, which emerged as a distinct style in Italy in about AD 1400, in parallel with developments which occurred in philosophy, literature, music, science, and technology.[2] Renaissance art took as its foundation the art of Classical antiquity, perceived as the noblest of ancient traditions, but transformed that tradition by absorbing recent developments in the art of Northern Europe and by applying contemporary scientific knowledge. Along with Renaissance humanist philosophy, it spread throughout Europe, affecting both artists and their patrons with the development of new techniques and new artistic sensibilities. For art historians, Renaissance art marks the transition of Europe from the medieval period to the Early Modern age.

The body of art, including painting, sculpture, architecture, music and literature identified as "Renaissance art" was primarily produced during the 14th, 15th, and 16th centuries in Europe under the combined influences of an increased awareness of nature, a revival of classical learning, and a more individualistic view of man.[3] Scholars no longer believe that the Renaissance marked an abrupt break with medieval values, as is suggested by the French word renaissance, literally meaning "rebirth". In many parts of Europe, Early Renaissance art was created in parallel with Late Medieval art.

Origins

Many influences on the development of Renaissance men and women in the early 15th century have been credited with the emergence of Renaissance art; they are the same as those that affected philosophy, literature, architecture, theology, science, government and other aspects of society. The following list presents a summary of changes to social and cultural conditions which have been identified as factors which contributed to the development of Renaissance art. Each is dealt with more fully in the main articles cited above. The scholars of Renaissance period focused on present life and ways improve human life. They did not pay much attention to medieval philosophy or religion. During this period, scholars and humanists like Erasmus, Dante and Petrarch criticized superstitious beliefs and also questioned them. [4] The concept of education also widened its spectrum and focused more on creating 'an ideal man' who would have a fair understanding of arts, music, poetry and literature and would have the ability to appreciate these aspects of life.

Classical texts, lost to European scholars for centuries, became available. These included documents of philosophy, prose, poetry, drama, science, a thesis on the arts, and early Christian theology.
Europe gained access to advanced mathematics, which had its provenance in the works of Islamic scholars.
The advent of movable type printing in the 15th century meant that ideas could be disseminated easily, and an increasing number of books were written for a broader public.
The establishment of the Medici Bank and the subsequent trade it generated brought unprecedented wealth to a single Italian city, Florence.
Cosimo de' Medici set a new standard for patronage of the arts, not associated with the church or monarchy.
Humanist philosophy meant that man's relationship with humanity, the universe and God was no longer the exclusive province of the church.
A revived interest in the Classics brought about the first archaeological study of Roman remains by the architect Brunelleschi and sculptor Donatello. The revival of a style of architecture based on classical precedents inspired a corresponding classicism in painting and sculpture, which manifested itself as early as the 1420s in the paintings of Masaccio and Uccello.
The improvement of oil paint and developments in oil-painting technique by Belgian and French artists such as Robert Campin, Jan van Eyck, Rogier van der Weyden and Hugo van der Goes led to its adoption in Italy from about 1475 and had ultimately lasting effects on painting practices worldwide.
The serendipitous presence within the region of Florence in the early 15th century of certain individuals of artistic genius, most notably Masaccio, Brunelleschi, Ghiberti, Piero della Francesca, Donatello and Michelozzo formed an ethos out of which sprang the great masters of the High Renaissance, as well as supporting and encouraging many lesser artists to achieve work of extraordinary quality.[5]
A similar heritage of artistic achievement occurred in Venice through the talented Bellini family, their influential in-law Mantegna, Giorgione, Titian and Tintoretto.[5][6][7]
The publication of two treatises by Leone Battista Alberti, De pictura ("On Painting") in 1435 and De re aedificatoria ("Ten Books on Architecture") in 1452.

History

Proto-Renaissance in Italy, 1280–1400

In Italy in the late 13th and early 14th centuries, the sculpture of Nicola Pisano and his son Giovanni Pisano, working at Pisa, Siena and Pistoia shows markedly classicising tendencies, probably influenced by the familiarity of these artists with ancient Roman sarcophagi. Their masterpieces are the pulpits of the Baptistery and Cathedral of Pisa.

Contemporary with Giovanni Pisano, the Florentine painter Giotto developed a manner of figurative painting that was unprecedentedly naturalistic, three-dimensional, lifelike and classicist, when compared with that of his contemporaries and teacher Cimabue. Giotto, whose greatest work is the cycle of the Life of Christ at the Arena Chapel in Padua, was seen by the 16th-century biographer Giorgio Vasari as "rescuing and restoring art" from the "crude, traditional, Byzantine style" prevalent in Italy in the 13th century.

Early Renaissance in Italy, 1400–1495

Although both the Pisanos and Giotto had students and followers, the first truly Renaissance artists were not to emerge in Florence until 1401 with the competition to sculpt a set of bronze doors of the Baptistery of Florence Cathedral, which drew entries from seven young sculptors including Brunelleschi, Donatello and the winner, Lorenzo Ghiberti. Brunelleschi, most famous as the architect of the dome of Florence Cathedral and the Church of San Lorenzo, created a number of sculptural works, including a life-sized crucifix in Santa Maria Novella, renowned for its naturalism. His studies of perspective are thought to have influenced the painter Masaccio. Donatello became renowned as the greatest sculptor of the Early Renaissance, his masterpieces being his humanist and unusually erotic statue of David, one of the icons of the Florentine republic, and his great monument to Gattamelata, the first large equestrian bronze to be created since Roman times.

The contemporary of Donatello, Masaccio, was the painterly descendant of Giotto and began the Early Renaissance in Italian painting in 1425, furthering the trend towards solidity of form and naturalism of face and gesture that Giotto had begun a century earlier. From 1425 to 1428, Masaccio completed several panel paintings but is best known for the fresco cycle that he began in the Brancacci Chapel with the older artist Masolino and which had a profound influence on later painters, including Michelangelo. Masaccio's developments were carried forward in the paintings of Fra Angelico, particularly in his frescos at the Convent of San Marco in Florence.

The treatment of the elements of perspective and light in painting was of particular concern to 15th-century Florentine painters. Uccello was so obsessed with trying to achieve an appearance of perspective that, according to Giorgio Vasari, it disturbed his sleep. His solutions can be seen in his masterpiece set of three paintings, the Battle of San Romano, which is believed to have been completed by 1460. Piero della Francesca made systematic and scientific studies of both light and linear perspective, the results of which can be seen in his fresco cycle of The History of the True Cross in San Francesco, Arezzo.

In Naples, the painter Antonello da Messina began using oil paints for portraits and religious paintings at a date that preceded other Italian painters, possibly about 1450. He carried this technique north and influenced the painters of Venice. One of the most significant painters of Northern Italy was Andrea Mantegna, who decorated the interior of a room, the Camera degli Sposi for his patron Ludovico Gonzaga, setting portraits of the family and court into an illusionistic architectural space.

The end period of the Early Renaissance in Italian art is marked, like its beginning, by a particular commission that drew artists together, this time in cooperation rather than competition. Pope Sixtus IV had rebuilt the Papal Chapel, named the Sistine Chapel in his honour, and commissioned a group of artists, Sandro Botticelli, Pietro Perugino, Domenico Ghirlandaio and Cosimo Rosselli to decorate its wall with fresco cycles depicting the Life of Christ and the Life of Moses. In the sixteen large paintings, the artists, although each working in his individual style, agreed on principles of format, and utilised the techniques of lighting, linear and atmospheric perspective, anatomy, foreshortening and characterisation that had been carried to a high point in the large Florentine studios of Ghiberti, Verrocchio, Ghirlandaio and Perugino.

Early Netherlandish art, 1425–1525

The painters of the Low Countries in this period included Jan van Eyck, his brother Hubert van Eyck, Robert Campin, Hans Memling, Rogier van der Weyden and Hugo van der Goes. Their painting developed partly independently of Early Italian Renaissance painting, and without the influence of a deliberate and conscious striving to revive antiquity.

The style of painting grew directly out of medieval painting in tempera, on panels and illuminated manuscripts, and other forms such as stained glass; the medium of fresco was less common in northern Europe. The medium used was oil paint, which had long been utilised for painting leather ceremonial shields and accoutrements because it was flexible and relatively durable. The earliest Netherlandish oil paintings are meticulous and detailed like tempera paintings. The material lent itself to the depiction of tonal variations and texture, so facilitating the observation of nature in great detail.

The Netherlandish painters did not approach the creation of a picture through a framework of linear perspective and correct proportion. They maintained a medieval view of hierarchical proportion and religious symbolism, while delighting in a realistic treatment of material elements, both natural and man-made. Jan van Eyck, with his brother Hubert, painted The Altarpiece of the Mystical Lamb. It is probable that Antonello da Messina became familiar with Van Eyck's work, while in Naples or Sicily. In 1475, Hugo van der Goes' Portinari Altarpiece arrived in Florence, where it was to have a profound influence on many painters, most immediately Domenico Ghirlandaio, who painted an altarpiece imitating its elements.

A very significant Netherlandish painter towards the end of the period was Hieronymus Bosch, who employed the type of fanciful forms that were often utilized to decorate borders and letters in illuminated manuscripts, combining plant and animal forms with architectonic ones. When taken from the context of the illumination and peopled with humans, these forms give Bosch's paintings a surreal quality which have no parallel in the work of any other Renaissance painter. His masterpiece is the triptych The Garden of Earthly Delights.

Early Renaissance in France, 1375–1528

The artists of France (including duchies such as Burgundy) were often associated with courts, providing illuminated manuscripts and portraits for the nobility as well as devotional paintings and altarpieces. Among the most famous were the Limbourg brothers, Flemish illuminators and creators of the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry manuscript illumination. Jean Fouquet, painter of the royal court, visited Italy in 1437 and reflects the influence of Florentine painters such as Paolo Uccello. Although best known for his portraits such as that of Charles VII of France, Fouquet also created illuminations, and is thought to be the inventor of the portrait miniature.

There were a number of artists at this date who painted famous altarpieces, that are stylistically quite distinct from both the Italian and the Flemish. These include two enigmatic figures, Enguerrand Quarton, to whom is ascribed the Pieta of Villeneuve-lès-Avignon, and Jean Hey, otherwise known as "the Master of Moulins" after his most famous work, the Moulins Altarpiece. In these works, realism and close observation of the human figure, emotions and lighting are combined with a medieval formality, which includes gilt backgrounds.

High Renaissance in Italy, 1495–1520

The "universal genius" Leonardo da Vinci further perfected the aspects of pictorial art (lighting, linear and atmospheric perspective, anatomy, foreshortening, and characterisation) that had preoccupied artists of the Early Renaissance in a lifetime of studying and meticulously recording his observations of the natural world. His adoption of oil paint as his primary media meant that he could depict light and its effects on the landscape and objects more naturally and with greater dramatic effect than had ever been done before, as demonstrated in the Mona Lisa (1503–1506). His dissection of cadavers carried forward the understanding of skeletal and muscular anatomy, as seen in the unfinished Saint Jerome in the Wilderness (c. 1480). His depiction of human emotion in The Last Supper, completed 1495–1498, set the benchmark for religious painting.

The art of Leonardo's younger contemporary Michelangelo took a very different direction. Michelangelo in neither his painting nor his sculpture demonstrates any interest in the observation of any natural object except the human body. He perfected his technique in depicting it, while in his early twenties, by the creation of the enormous marble statue of David and the group Pietà, in the St Peter's Basilica, Rome. He then set about an exploration of the expressive possibilities of the human anatomy. His commission by Pope Julius II to paint the Sistine Chapel ceiling resulted in the supreme masterpiece of figurative composition, which was to have profound effect on every subsequent generation of European artists.[8] His later work, The Last Judgement, painted on the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel between 1534 and 1541, shows a Mannerist (also called Late Renaissance) style with generally elongated bodies which took over from the High Renaissance style between 1520 and 1530.

Standing alongside Leonardo and Michelangelo as the third great painter of the High Renaissance was the younger Raphael, who in a short lifespan painted a great number of lifelike and engaging portraits, including those of Pope Julius II and his successor Pope Leo X, and numerous portrayals of the Madonna and Christ Child, including the Sistine Madonna. His death in 1520 at age 37 is considered by many art historians to be the end of the High Renaissance period, although some individual artists continued working in the High Renaissance style for many years thereafter.

In Northern Italy, the High Renaissance is represented primarily by members of the Venetian school, especially by the latter works of Giovanni Bellini, especially religious paintings, which include several large altarpieces of a type known as "Sacred Conversation", which show a group of saints around the enthroned Madonna. His contemporary Giorgione, who died at about the age of 32 in 1510, left a small number of enigmatic works, including The Tempest, the subject of which has remained a matter of speculation. The earliest works of Titian date from the era of the High Renaissance, including the massive altarpiece The Assumption of the Virgin, which combines human action and drama with spectacular colour and atmosphere. Titian continued painting in a generally High Renaissance style until near the end of his career in the 1570s, although he increasingly used colour and light over line to define his figures.

German Renaissance art

German Renaissance art falls into the broader category of the Renaissance in Northern Europe, also known as the Northern Renaissance. Renaissance influences began to appear in German art in the 15th century, but this trend was not widespread. Gardner's Art Through the Ages identifies Michael Pacher, a painter and sculptor, as the first German artist whose work begins to show Italian Renaissance influences. According to that source, Pacher's painting, St. Wolfgang Forces the Devil to Hold His Prayerbook (c. 1481), is Late Gothic in style, but also shows the influence of the Italian artist Mantegna.[9]

In the 1500s, Renaissance art in Germany became more common as, according to Gardner, "The art of northern Europe during the sixteenth century is characterized by a sudden awareness of the advances made by the Italian Renaissance and by a desire to assimilate this new style as rapidly as possible."[10] One of the best known practitioners of German Renaissance art was Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528), whose fascination with classical ideas led him to Italy to study art. Both Gardner and Russell recognized the importance of Dürer's contribution to German art in bringing Italian Renaissance styles and ideas to Germany.[11][12] Russell calls this "Opening the Gothic windows of German art",[11] while Gardner calls it Dürer's "life mission".[12] Importantly, as Gardner points out, Dürer "was the first northern artist who fully understood the basic aims of the southern Renaissance",[12] although his style did not always reflect that. The same source says that Hans Holbein the Younger (1497–1543) successfully assimilated Italian ideas while also keeping "northern traditions of close realism".[13] This is contrasted with Dürer's tendency to work in "his own native German style"[12] instead of combining German and Italian styles. Other important artists of the German Renaissance were Matthias Grünewald, Albrecht Altdorfer and Lucas Cranach the Elder.[14]

Artisans such as engravers became more concerned with aesthetics rather than just perfecting their crafts. Germany had master engravers, such as Martin Schongauer, who did metal engravings in the late 1400s. Gardner relates this mastery of the graphic arts to advances in printing which occurred in Germany, and says that metal engraving began to replace the woodcut during the Renaissance.[15] However, some artists, such as Albrecht Dürer, continued to do woodcuts. Both Gardner and Russell describe the fine quality of Dürer's woodcuts, with Russell stating in The World of Dürer that Dürer "elevated them into high works of art".[11]

Britain

Britain was very late to develop a distinct Renaissance style and most artists of the Tudor court were imported foreigners, usually from the Low Countries, including Hans Holbein the Younger, who died in England. One exception was the portrait miniature, which artists including Nicholas Hilliard developed into a distinct genre well before it became popular in the rest of Europe. Renaissance art in Scotland was similarly dependent on imported artists, and largely restricted to the court.

Themes and symbolism

Renaissance artists painted a wide variety of themes. Religious altarpieces, fresco cycles, and small works for private devotion were very popular. For inspiration, painters in both Italy and northern Europe frequently turned to Jacobus de Voragine's Golden Legend (1260), a highly influential source book for the lives of saints that had already had a strong influence on Medieval artists. The rebirth of classical antiquity and Renaissance humanism also resulted in many mythological and history paintings. Ovidian stories, for example, were very popular. Decorative ornament, often used in painted architectural elements, was especially influenced by classical Roman motifs.

Techniques

The use of proportion – The first major treatment of the painting as a window into space appeared in the work of Giotto di Bondone, at the beginning of the 14th century.  True linear perspective was formalized later, by Filippo Brunelleschi and Leon Battista Alberti.  In addition to giving a more realistic presentation of art, it moved Renaissance painters into composing more paintings.
Foreshortening – The term foreshortening refers to the artistic effect of shortening lines in a drawing so as to create an illusion of depth.
Sfumato – The term sfumato was coined by Italian Renaissance artist Leonardo da Vinci and refers to a fine art painting technique of blurring or softening of sharp outlines by subtle and gradual blending of one tone into another through the use of thin glazes to give the illusion of depth or three-dimensionality. This stems from the Italian word sfumare meaning to evaporate or to fade out. The Latin origin is fumare, to smoke.
Chiaroscuro – The term chiaroscuro refers to the fine art painting modeling effect of using a strong contrast between light and dark to give the illusion of depth or three-dimensionality. This comes from the Italian words meaning light (chiaro) and dark (scuro), a technique which came into wide use in the Baroque period.

List of Renaissance artists

Italy

Architecture
Dance
Fine arts
Greek scholars
Humanism
Literature
Magic
Music
Philosophy
Science
Technology
Warfare

England
France
Germany
Italy
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Scotland
Northern Europe
Low Countries

Age of Discovery
Continuity thesis
High Renaissance

vte

Giotto di Bondone (1267–1337)
Filippo Brunelleschi (1377–1446)
Masolino (c. 1383 – c. 1447)
Donatello (c. 1386 – 1466)
Pisanello (c. 1395 – c. 1455)
Fra Angelico (c. 1395 – 1455)
Paolo Uccello (1397–1475)
Masaccio (1401–1428)
Leone Battista Alberti (1404–1472)
Filippo Lippi (c. 1406 – 1469)
Domenico Veneziano (c. 1410 – 1461)
Piero della Francesca (c. 1415 – 1492)
Andrea del Castagno (c. 1421 – 1457)
Benozzo Gozzoli (c. 1421 – 1497)
Alessio Baldovinetti (1425–1499)
Antonio del Pollaiuolo (1429–1498)
Antonello da Messina (c. 1430 – 1479)
Giovanni Bellini (c.1430–1516)
Andrea Mantegna (c. 1431 – 1506)
Andrea del Verrocchio (c. 1435 – 1488)
Giovanni Santi (1435–1494)
Carlo Crivelli (c. 1435 – c. 1495)
Donato Bramante (1444–1514)
Sandro Botticelli (c. 1445 – 1510)
Luca Signorelli (c. 1445 – 1523)
Biagio d'Antonio (1446–1516)
Pietro Perugino (1446–1523)
Domenico Ghirlandaio (1449–1494)
Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519)
Pinturicchio (1454–1513)
Filippino Lippi (1457–1504)
Andrea Solari (1460–1524)
Piero di Cosimo (1462–1522)
Vittore Carpaccio (1465–1526)
Bernardino de' Conti (1465–1525)
Giorgione (c. 1473–1510)
Michelangelo (1475–1564)
Lorenzo Lotto (1480–1557)
Raphael (1483–1520)
Marco Cardisco (c. 1486 – c. 1542)
Titian (c. 1488/1490 – 1576)
Correggio (c. 1489 – 1534)
Pietro Negroni (c. 1505 – c. 1565)
Sofonisba Anguissola (c. 1532 – 1625)

Low Countries

Hubert van Eyck (1366?–1426)
Robert Campin (c. 1380 – 1444)
Limbourg brothers (fl. 1385–1416)
Jan van Eyck (1385?–1440?)
Rogier van der Weyden (1399/1400–1464)
Jacques Daret (c. 1404 – c. 1470)
Petrus Christus (1410/1420–1472)
Dirk Bouts (1415–1475)
Hugo van der Goes (c. 1430/1440 – 1482)
Hans Memling (c. 1430 – 1494)
Hieronymus Bosch (c. 1450 – 1516)
Gerard David (c. 1455 – 1523)
Geertgen tot Sint Jans (c. 1465 – c. 1495)
Quentin Matsys (1466–1530)
Jean Bellegambe (c. 1470 – 1535)
Joachim Patinir (c. 1480 – 1524)
Adriaen Isenbrant (c. 1490 – 1551)

Germany

Hans Holbein the Elder (c. 1460 – 1524)
Matthias Grünewald (c. 1470 – 1528)
Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528)
Lucas Cranach the Elder (1472–1553)
Hans Burgkmair (1473–1531)
Jerg Ratgeb (c. 1480 – 1526)
Albrecht Altdorfer (c. 1480 – 1538)
Leonhard Beck (c. 1480 – 1542)
Hans Baldung (c. 1480 – 1545)
Wilhelm Stetter (1487–1552)
Barthel Bruyn the Elder (1493–1555)
Ambrosius Holbein (1494–1519)
Hans Holbein the Younger (c. 1497 – 1543)
Conrad Faber von Kreuznach (c. 1500 – c. 1553)
Lucas Cranach the Younger (1515–1586)

France

Jean de Beaumetz (c. 1335 – 1396)
Colart de Laon (c. 1355 – 1417)
Enguerrand Quarton (c. 1410 – c. 1466)
Henri Bellechose (fl. before 1415 – before 1445)
Barthélemy d'Eyck (c. 1420 – after 1470)
Jean Fouquet (1420 – 1481)
André d'Ypres [fr] (before 1425 – 1450)
Simon Marmion (c. 1425 – 1489)
Nicolas Froment (c. 1435 – c. 1486)
Jean Changenet [fr] (? – 1494)
Jean Poyer (c. 1445 – c. 1503)
Colin d'Amiens [fr] (c. 1450 – c. 1500)
Jean Perréal (c. 1455 – c. 1530)
Jean Bourdichon (c. 1456 – c. 1521)
Gauthier de Campes [fr] (fl. 1468 – after 1530) possibly the Master of Saint Giles (c. 1500)
Jehan Bellegambe (c. 1470 – c. 1536)
Jean Hey (fl. c. 1475 – c. 1505)
Jean Clouet (1480 – 1541)
Josse Lieferinxe (fl. c. 1493 – c. 1508)
Nicolas Dipre (c. 1495 – 1532)
Simon de Châlons [fr] (c. 1500 – 1568)
Jean Cousin the Elder (1500 – before 1593)
François Clouet (c. 1510 – 1572)
Noël Jallier [fr] (? – after 1549)
Antoine Caron (1521 – 1599)
Jean Cousin the Younger (c. 1522 – 1595)
Master of Flora (before 1540 – 1560)
François Quesnel (c. 1543 – 1619)
Henri Lerambert [fr] (c. 1550 – 1608)
Jacob Bunel (1558 – 1614)
Toussaint Dubreuil (c. 1561 – 1602)
Martin Fréminet (1567 – 1619)
Philippe Millereau (c. 1570 – 1610)
Ambroise Dubois (fl. c. 1570 – 1619)
Quentin Varin (c. 1575 – 1626)
Georges Lallemand (c. 1575 – 1636)

Jean Malouel (neth. c. 1365 – 1415)
Corneille de Lyon (neth. c. 1500 – 1575)
Francesco Primaticcio (it. 1503 – 1570)
Grégoire Guérard (neth. before 1512 – after 1538)
Bartholomeus Pons (neth. before 1518 – after 1541)

Portugal

Grão Vasco (1475–1542)
Gregório Lopes (1490–1550)
Francisco de Holanda (1517–1585)
Cristóvão Lopes (1516–1594)
Cristóvão de Figueiredo (?-c.1543)
Jorge Afonso (1470–1540)
António de Holanda (1480–1571)
Cristóvão de Morais
Nuno Gonçalves (c. 1425 – c. 1491)
Francisco Henriques (?–1518)
Frei Carlos (?–1540)

Spain

Jaume Huguet (1412–1492)
Bartolomé Bermejo (c. 1440 – c. 1501)
Paolo da San Leocadio (1447 – c. 1520)
Pedro Berruguete (c. 1450 – 1504)
Ayne Bru
Juan de Flandes (c. 1460 – c. 1519)
Luis de Morales (1512–1586)
Alonso Sánchez Coello (1531–1588)
El Greco (1541–1614)
Juan Pantoja de la Cruz (1553–1608)

Venetian Dalmatia (modern Croatia)

Giorgio da Sebenico (c. 1410 – 1475)
Niccolò di Giovanni Fiorentino (1418–1506)
Andrea Alessi (1425–1505)
Francesco Laurana (c. 1430 – 1502)
Giovanni Dalmata (c. 1440 – c. 1514)
Nicholas of Ragusa (1460? – 1517)
Andrea Schiavone (c. 1510/1515 – 1563)

Works

Ghent Altarpiece, by Hubert and Jan van Eyck
The Arnolfini Portrait, by Jan van Eyck
The Werl Triptych, by Robert Campin
The Portinari Triptych, by Hugo van der Goes
The Descent from the Cross, by Rogier van der Weyden
Flagellation of Christ, by Piero della Francesca
Spring, by Sandro Botticelli
Lamentation of Christ, by Mantegna
The Last Supper, by Leonardo da Vinci
The School of Athens, by Raphael
Sistine Chapel ceiling, by Michelangelo
Equestrian Portrait of Charles V, by Titian
Isenheim Altarpiece, by Matthias Grünewald
Melencolia I, by Albrecht Dürer
The Ambassadors, by Hans Holbein the Younger
Melun Diptych, by Jean Fouquet
Saint Vincent Panels, by Nuno Gonçalves

Major collections

National Gallery, London, UK
Museo del Prado, Madrid, Spain
Uffizi, Florence, Italy
Louvre, Paris, France
National Gallery of Art, Washington, USA
Gemäldegalerie, Berlin, Germany
Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City, USA
Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium, Belgium, Brussels
Groeningemuseum, Bruges, Belgium
Old St. John's Hospital, Bruges, Belgium
Bargello, Florence, Italy
Château d'Écouen (National museum of the Renaissance), Écouen, France
Vatican Museums, Vatican City
Pinacoteca di Brera, Milan, Italy

See also

Arts portalVisual arts portal

Danube school
Forlivese school of art
Renaissance in Emilia
History of painting
I Modi
Mughal art
Oriental carpets in Renaissance painting
Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects

References

^ "Renaissance". encyclopedia.com. June 18, 2018.

^ "Renaissance art | Definition, Characteristics, Style, Examples, & Facts | Britannica". www.britannica.com. 2024-05-06. Retrieved 2024-05-23.

^ "Renaissance art | Definition, Characteristics, Style, Examples, & Facts | Britannica". www.britannica.com. 2024-05-06. Retrieved 2024-05-23.

^ "What were the impacts of Renaissance on art, architecture, science?". PreserveArticles.com: Preserving Your Articles for Eternity. 2011-09-07. Retrieved 2021-10-19.

^ a b Frederick Hartt, A History of Italian Renaissance Art, (1970)

^ Michael Baxandall, Painting and Experience in Fifteenth Century Italy, (1974)

^ Margaret Aston, The Fifteenth Century, the Prospect of Europe, (1979)

^ https://www.laetitiana.co.uk/2014/07/introduction-to-renaissance-movement.html[permanent dead link]

^ Gardner, Helen; De la Croix, Horst; Tansey, Richard G (1975). "The Renaissance in Northern Europe". Art Through the Ages (6th ed.). New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. p. 555. ISBN 0-15-503753-6.

^ Gardner, Helen; De la Croix, Horst; Tansey, Richard G (1975). "The Renaissance in Northern Europe". Art Through the Ages (6th ed.). New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 556–557. ISBN 0-15-503753-6.

^ a b c Russell, Francis (1967). The World of Dürer. Time Life Books, Time Inc. p. 9.

^ a b c d Gardner, Helen; De la Croix, Horst; Tansey, Richard G (1975). "The Renaissance in Northern Europe". Art Through the Ages (6th ed.). New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 561. ISBN 0-15-503753-6.

^ Gardner, Helen; De la Croix, Horst; Tansey, Richard G (1975). "The Renaissance in Northern Europe". Art Through the Ages (6th ed.). New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 564. ISBN 0-15-503753-6.

^ Gardner, Helen; De la Croix, Horst; Tansey, Richard G (1975). "The Renaissance in Northern Europe". Art Through the Ages (6th ed.). New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 557. ISBN 0-15-503753-6.

^ Gardner, Helen; De la Croix, Horst; Tansey, Richard G (1975). "The Renaissance in Northern Europe". Art Through the Ages (6th ed.). New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 555–556. ISBN 0-15-503753-6.

External links

The Inquiring Eye: European Renaissance Art, a teaching packet from the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C.

vte

Thracian
Dacian
Nuragic
Aegean
Cycladic
Minoan
Minyan ware
Mycenaean
Greek
Sub-Mycenaean
Protogeometric
Geometric
Orientalizing
Archaic
Black-figure
Red-figure
Severe style
Classical
Kerch style
Hellenistic
"Baroque"
Indo-Greek
Greco-Buddhist
Neo-Attic
Etruscan
Scythian
Iberian
Gaulish
Roman
Republican
Gallo-Roman
Julio-Claudian
Pompeian Styles
Trajanic
Severan

Dacian

Cycladic
Minoan
Minyan ware
Mycenaean

Sub-Mycenaean
Protogeometric
Geometric
Orientalizing
Archaic
Black-figure
Red-figure
Severe style
Classical
Kerch style
Hellenistic
"Baroque"
Indo-Greek
Greco-Buddhist
Neo-Attic

"Baroque"
Indo-Greek
Greco-Buddhist
Neo-Attic

Greco-Buddhist

Republican
Gallo-Roman
Julio-Claudian
Pompeian Styles
Trajanic
Severan

Late antique
Early Christian
Coptic
Ethiopian
Migration Period
Anglo-Saxon
Hunnic
Insular
Lombard
Visigothic
Donor portrait
Pictish
Mozarabic
Repoblación
Viking
Byzantine
Iconoclast
Macedonian
Palaeologan
Italo-Byzantine
Frankish
Merovingian
Carolingian
Pre-Romanesque
Ottonian
Romanesque
Mosan
Spanish
Norman
Norman-Sicilian
Opus Anglicanum
Gothic
Gothic art in Milan
International Gothic
International Gothic art in Italy
Lucchese school
Crusades
Moscow school
Novgorod school
Duecento
Sienese school
Mudéjar
Medieval cartography
Italian school
Majorcan school
Mappa mundi

Early Christian

Ethiopian

Anglo-Saxon
Hunnic
Insular
Lombard
Visigothic

Repoblación

Iconoclast
Macedonian
Palaeologan
Italo-Byzantine

Merovingian
Carolingian
Pre-Romanesque

Mosan
Spanish

Norman-Sicilian

Gothic art in Milan
International Gothic
International Gothic art in Italy

Sienese school

Italian school
Majorcan school
Mappa mundi

Italian Renaissance
Trecento
Proto-Renaissance
Florentine school
Pittura infamante
Quattrocento
Ferrarese school
Forlivese school
Venetian school
Cinquecento
High Renaissance
Bolognese school
Mannerism
Counter-Maniera
Northern Renaissance
Early Netherlandish
World landscape
Ghent–Bruges school
Northern Mannerism
German Renaissance
Cologne school
Danube school
Dutch and Flemish Renaissance
Antwerp Mannerism
Romanism
Still life
English Renaissance
Tudor court
Cretan school
Turquerie
Fontainebleau school
Art of the late 16th century in Milan

Trecento
Proto-Renaissance
Florentine school
Pittura infamante
Quattrocento
Ferrarese school
Forlivese school
Venetian school
Cinquecento
High Renaissance
Bolognese school
Mannerism
Counter-Maniera

Proto-Renaissance
Florentine school
Pittura infamante

Ferrarese school
Forlivese school
Venetian school

High Renaissance
Bolognese school
Mannerism
Counter-Maniera

Early Netherlandish
World landscape
Ghent–Bruges school
Northern Mannerism
German Renaissance
Cologne school
Danube school
Dutch and Flemish Renaissance
Antwerp Mannerism
Romanism
Still life

World landscape

Cologne school
Danube school

Antwerp Mannerism
Romanism
Still life

Tudor court

Baroque
Baroque in Milan
Flemish Baroque
Caravaggisti
in Utrecht
Tenebrism
Louis XIII style
Lutheran Baroque
Stroganov school
Animal painting
Guild of Romanists
Dutch Golden Age
Delft school
Capriccio
Heptanese school
Classicism
Louis XIV style
Poussinists and Rubenists

Baroque in Milan
Flemish Baroque
Caravaggisti
in Utrecht
Tenebrism
Louis XIII style
Lutheran Baroque

in Utrecht
Tenebrism

Delft school

Louis XIV style
Poussinists and Rubenists

Rococo
Rocaille
Louis XV style
Frederician
Chinoiserie
Fête galante
Neoclassicism
Goût grec
Louis XVI style
Adam style
Directoire style
Neoclassical architecture in Milan
Picturesque

Rocaille
Louis XV style
Frederician
Chinoiserie
Fête galante

Goût grec
Louis XVI style
Adam style
Directoire style
Neoclassical architecture in Milan

Art of the African diaspora
African-American
Caribbean
Haitian
Colonial Asian art
Arts in the Philippines
Letras y figuras
Tipos del País
Colonial Asian Baroque
Company style
Latin American art
Casta painting
Indochristian art
Chilote school
Cuzco school
Quito school
Latin American Baroque

African-American
Caribbean
Haitian

Haitian

Arts in the Philippines
Letras y figuras
Tipos del País
Colonial Asian Baroque
Company style

Letras y figuras
Tipos del País

Casta painting
Indochristian art
Chilote school
Cuzco school
Quito school
Latin American Baroque

Chilote school
Cuzco school
Quito school

Islamic
Moorish
Manichaean
Mughal
Qajar
Qing handicrafts
Western influence in Japan
Akita ranga
Uki-e

Moorish

Akita ranga
Uki-e

Romanticism
Fairy painting
Danish Golden Age
Troubadour style
Nazarene movement
Purismo
Shoreham Ancients
Düsseldorf school
Pre-Raphaelites
Hudson River School
American luminism
Orientalism
Norwich school
Empire style
Historicism
Revivalism
Biedermeier
Realism
Barbizon school
Costumbrismo
Verismo
Macchiaioli
Academic art
Munich school
in Greece
Neo-Grec
Etching revival

Fairy painting
Danish Golden Age
Troubadour style
Nazarene movement
Purismo
Shoreham Ancients
Düsseldorf school
Pre-Raphaelites
Hudson River School
American luminism

American luminism

Revivalism

Barbizon school
Costumbrismo
Verismo
Macchiaioli

Macchiaioli

Munich school
in Greece
Neo-Grec

in Greece

Neo-romanticism
National romanticism
Yōga
Nihonga
Japonisme
Anglo-Japanese style
Beuron school
Hague school
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
American
Hoosier Group
Boston school
Amsterdam
Canadian
Heidelberg school
Aestheticism
Arts and Crafts
Art pottery
Tonalism
Decadent movement
Symbolism
Romanian
Russian
Volcano school
Incoherents
Post-Impressionism
Neo-Impressionism
Luminism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Pont-Aven School
Cloisonnism
Synthetism
Les Nabis
American Barbizon school
California tonalism
Costumbrismo

National romanticism

Anglo-Japanese style

American
Hoosier Group
Boston school
Amsterdam
Canadian
Heidelberg school

Hoosier Group
Boston school

Art pottery

Romanian
Russian

Neo-Impressionism
Luminism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Pont-Aven School
Cloisonnism
Synthetism
Les Nabis

Luminism

California tonalism

Art Nouveau
Art Nouveau in Milan
Primitivism
California Impressionism
Secessionism
School of Paris
Munich Secession
Vienna Secession
Berlin Secession
Sonderbund
Pennsylvania Impressionism
Mir iskusstva
Ten American Painters
Fauvism
Expressionism
Die Brücke
Der Blaue Reiter
Noucentisme
Deutscher Werkbund
American Realism
Ashcan school
Cubism
Proto-Cubism
Orphism
A Nyolcak
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Futurism
Cubo-Futurism
Art Deco
Metaphysical
Rayonism
Productivism
Synchromism
Vorticism

Art Nouveau in Milan

Munich Secession
Vienna Secession
Berlin Secession
Sonderbund

Die Brücke
Der Blaue Reiter

Ashcan school

Proto-Cubism
Orphism

Cubo-Futurism

Sosaku-hanga
Suprematism
School of Paris
Crystal Cubism
Constructivism
Latin American
Universal Constructivism
Dada
Shin-hanga
Neoplasticism
De Stijl
Purism
Return to order
Novecento Italiano
Figurative Constructivism
Stupid
Cologne Progressives
Arbeitsrat für Kunst
November Group
Australian tonalism
Dresden Secession
Social realism
Functionalism
Bauhaus
Kinetic art
Anthropophagy
Mingei
Group of Seven
New Objectivity
Grosvenor school
Neues Sehen
Surrealism
Iranian
Latin American
Mexican muralism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Aeropittura
Asso
Scuola Romana
Cercle et Carré
The Group
Harlem Renaissance
Kapists
Regionalism
California Scene Painting
Heroic realism
Socialist realism
Nazi art
Streamline Moderne
Concrete art
Abstraction-Création
Tiki
The Ten
Dimensionism
Boston Expressionism
Leningrad school

Latin American
Universal Constructivism

Universal Constructivism

De Stijl

Novecento Italiano

Stupid
Cologne Progressives

November Group

Bauhaus

Iranian
Latin American

California Scene Painting

Socialist realism
Nazi art

Abstraction-Création

International Typographic Style
Abstract expressionism
Washington Color School
Visionary art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Spatialism
Color field
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
Arte Informale
COBRA
Nuagisme
Generación de la Ruptura
Jikken Kōbō
Metcalf Chateau
Mono-ha
Nanyang Style
Action painting
American Figurative Expressionism
in New York
New media art
New York school
Hard-edge painting
Bay Area Figurative Movement
Les Plasticiens
Gutai Art Association
Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai
Pop art
Situationist International
Soviet Nonconformist
Ukrainian underground
Lettrism
Letterist International
Ultra-Lettrist
Florida Highwaymen
Cybernetic art
Antipodeans

Washington Color School

Vienna School of Fantastic Realism

Tachisme
Arte Informale
COBRA
Nuagisme

in New York

Ukrainian underground

Letterist International
Ultra-Lettrist

Otra Figuración
Afrofuturism
Nueva Presencia
ZERO
Happening
Neo-Dada
Neo-Dada Organizers
Op art
Nouveau réalisme
Nouvelle tendance
Capitalist realism
Art & Language
Arte Povera
Black Arts Movement
The Caribbean Artists Movement
Chicano art movement
Conceptual art
Land art
Systems art
Video art
Minimalism
Fluxus
Generative art
Post-painterly abstraction
Intermedia
Psychedelic art
Nut Art
Photorealism
Environmental art
Performance art
Process art
Institutional critique
Light and Space
Street art
Feminist art movement
in the US
Saqqakhaneh movement
The Stars Art Group
Tropicália
Yoru no Kai
Artificial intelligence art

Neo-Dada Organizers

in the US

Post-conceptual art
Installation art
Artscene
Postminimalism
Endurance art
Sots Art
Moscow Conceptualists
Pattern and Decoration
Pliontanism
Punk art
Neo-expressionism
Transavantgarde
Saint Soleil school
Guerrilla art
Lowbrow art
Telematic art
Appropriation art
Neo-conceptual art
New European Painting
Tunisian collaborative painting
Memphis Group
Cyberdelic
Neue Slowenische Kunst
Scratch video
Transgressive
Retrofuturism
Young British Artists
Superfiction
Taring Padi
Superflat
New Leipzig school
Artist-run initiative
Artivism
The Designers Republic
Grunge design
Verdadism
Chinese Apartment Art

Moscow Conceptualists

Transavantgarde

Amazonian pop art
Altermodern
Art for art
Art game
Art intervention
Brandalism
Classical Realism
Contemporary African art
Africanfuturism
Contemporary Indigenous Australian art
Crypto art
Cyborg art
Excessivism
Fictive art
Flat design
Corporate Memphis
Hypermodernism
Hyperrealism
Idea art
Internet art
Post-Internet
iPhone art
Kitsch movement
Lightpainting
Massurrealism
Modern European ink painting
Neo-futurism
Neomodern
Neosymbolism
Passionism
Post-YBAs
Relational art
Skeuomorphism
Software art
Sound art
Stuckism
Superflat
SoFlo Superflat
Superstroke
Toyism
Unilalianism
Vaporwave
Walking Artists Network

Africanfuturism

Corporate Memphis

Post-Internet

SoFlo Superflat
Superstroke

History of art
Abstract art
Asemic writing
Anti-art
Avant-garde
Ballets Russes
Christian art
Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation
Catholic art
Icon
Lutheran art
Digital art
Fantastic art
Folk art
Hierarchy of genres
Genre painting
History painting
Illuminated manuscript
Illustration
Interactive art
Jewish art
Kitsch
Landscape painting
Modernism
Modern sculpture
Late modernism
Naïve art
Outsider art
Portrait
Prehistoric European art
Queer art
Realism
Shock art
Trompe-l'œil
Western painting

Asemic writing

Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation
Catholic art
Icon
Lutheran art

Genre painting
History painting

Modern sculpture
Late modernism

Category

vte

Renaissance
Greek scholars in the Renaissance
High Renaissance
Mannerism
Northern Mannerism
Outline of the Renaissance
Renaissance studies

Northern Mannerism

Architecture
Brick
Central and Eastern Europe
French
Italian domes
Palladian
Plateresque
Portuguese
Purism
Spanish
Venetian
Art
Early Netherlandish painting
Dutch and Flemish painting
Italian painting
Sculpture
Italian sculpture
Dance
Humanism
France
Northern Europe
Latin
Literature
Dutch
French
Spanish
Magic
Medicine
Music
Philosophy
Platonism in the Renaissance
Science
Scientific Revolution
Technology
Theatre
Warfare

Brick
Central and Eastern Europe
French
Italian domes
Palladian
Plateresque
Portuguese
Purism
Spanish
Venetian

Early Netherlandish painting
Dutch and Flemish painting
Italian painting
Sculpture
Italian sculpture

France
Northern Europe

Dutch
French
Spanish

Platonism in the Renaissance

Scientific Revolution

Bergamo and Brescia
Ferrara
Florence
Lombardy
Rome
Papacy
Sicily
Urbino
Venice

Papacy

England
France
Germany
Saxony
Weser
Low Countries
Poland
Scotland

Saxony
Weser

Portugal
Spain
Spanish Golden Age

Spanish Golden Age

Composers
Figures
Humanists
Structures

Cloak and dagger
Medieval renaissances
Carolingian
Ottonian
12th century
Reenactment

Carolingian
Ottonian
12th century

FAST

United StatesJapanCzech RepublicSpainLatviaIsrael

A Tale of Two Cities is a historical novel published in 1859 by English author Charles Dickens, set in London and Paris before and during the French Revolution. The novel tells the story of the French Doctor Manette, his 18-year-long imprisonment in the Bastille in Paris, and his release to live in London with his daughter Lucie whom he had never met. The story is set against the conditions that led up to the French Revolution and the Reign of Terror.

As Dickens's best-known work of historical fiction, A Tale of Two Cities is said to be one of the best-selling novels of all time.[2][3][4] In 2003, the novel was ranked 63rd on the BBC's The Big Read poll.[5]  The novel has been adapted for film, television, radio, and the stage, and has continued to influence popular culture.

Synopsis

Book the First: Recalled to Life

Dickens opens the novel with a sentence that has become famous:

It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct the other way—in short, the period was so far like the present period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being received, for good or for evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only.[6]

In 1775, Jerry Cruncher flags down the nightly mail-coach en route from London to Dover. Cruncher is an employee of Tellson's Bank in London; he carries a message for Jarvis Lorry, one of the bank's managers. Lorry sends Jerry back with the cryptic response "Recalled to Life", referring to Alexandre Manette, a French physician who has been released from the Bastille after an 18-year imprisonment. On arrival in Dover, Lorry meets Dr. Manette's daughter Lucie and her governess, Miss Pross. Believing her father to be dead, Lucie faints at the news that he is alive. Lorry takes her to France for a reunion.

In the Paris neighbourhood of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, Dr. Manette has been given lodgings by his former servant Ernest Defarge and his wife Therese, the owners of a wine shop. Lorry and Lucie find him in a small garret where he spends much of his time distractedly and obsessively making shoes – a skill he learned in prison. Lorry and Lucie take him back to England.

Book the Second: The Golden Thread

In 1780, French émigré Charles Darnay is on trial in London for treason against the British Crown. The key witnesses against him are two British spies, John Barsad and Roger Cly. Barsad claims that he would recognise Darnay anywhere, but Darnay's lawyer points out that his colleague in court, Sydney Carton, bears a strong resemblance to the prisoner. With Barsad's testimony thus undermined, Darnay is acquitted.

In Paris, the hated and abusive Marquis St. Evrémonde orders his carriage driven recklessly fast through the crowded streets, hitting and killing a child. The Marquis throws a coin to the child's father, Gaspard, to compensate him for his loss; as the Marquis drives on, the coin is flung back into the carriage.

Arriving at his country château, the Marquis meets Darnay, his nephew and heir. Out of disgust with his aristocratic family, the nephew has replaced his surname (St. Evrémonde) with Darnay, an anglicised version of mother's maiden name (D'Aulnais). He despises the Marquis' views that "Repression is the only lasting philosophy. The dark deference of fear and slavery ... will keep the dogs obedient to the whip, as long as this roof [looking up to it] shuts out the sky."[7] That night, Gaspard creeps into the château and stabs and kills the Marquis in his sleep. He avoids capture for nearly a year, but is eventually hanged in the nearby village.

In London, Carton confesses his love to Lucie, but quickly recognises that she does not love him. He nevertheless promises to "embrace any sacrifice for you and for those dear to you".[8] Darnay asks for Dr. Manette's permission to wed Lucie, and he agrees. On the morning of the marriage, Darnay reveals his real name and lineage to Dr. Manette, facts that Manette had asked him to withhold until that day. The unexpected revelation causes Dr. Manette to revert to his obsessive shoemaking. He returns to sanity before their return from honeymoon, and the whole incident is kept secret from Lucie.

As the years pass, Lucie and Charles raise a family in England: a son (who dies in childhood) and a daughter, little Lucie. Lorry finds a second home with them. Carton, though he seldom visits, is accepted as a close friend and becomes a special favourite of little Lucie.

In Paris in July 1789, the Defarges help to lead the storming of the Bastille, a symbol of royal tyranny. Defarge enters Dr. Manette's former cell and searches it thoroughly. Throughout the countryside, local officials and other representatives of the aristocracy are slaughtered, and the St. Evrémonde château is burned to the ground.

In 1792, Lorry travels to France to save important documents stored at Tellson's Paris branch from the chaos of the French Revolution. Darnay receives a letter from Gabelle, one of his uncle's former servants who has been imprisoned by the revolutionaries, pleading for Darnay (now the Marquis St. Evrémonde) to help secure his release. Without telling his family or revealing his position as the new marquis, Darnay also sets out for Paris.

Book the Third: The Track of a Storm

On his way to Paris, Darnay is arrested as a returning emigrated aristocrat and jailed in La Force Prison. Hoping to be able to save him, Dr. Manette, Lucie and her daughter, Jerry, and Miss Pross all move to Paris and take up lodgings near those of Lorry.

Fifteen months later Darnay is finally tried, and Dr. Manette – viewed as a popular hero after his long imprisonment in the Bastille – testifies on his behalf. Darnay is acquitted and released, but is re-arrested later that day.

While running errands with Jerry, Miss Pross is amazed to run into her long-lost brother Solomon. Now posing as a Frenchman, he is an employee of the revolutionary authorities and one of Darnay's gaolers. Carton also recognises him – as Barsad, one of the spies who tried to frame Darnay at his trial in 1780. Solomon is desperate to keep his true identity hidden, and Carton blackmails him into helping with a play by threatening to denounce him as an English spy.

Darnay's retrial the following day is based on new denunciations by the Defarges and on a manuscript that Defarge had found in Dr. Manette's Bastille cell. Defarge reads the manuscript to the tribunal. In it, Dr. Manette had recorded that his imprisonment was at the hands of the Evrémonde brothers (Darnay's father and uncle) after he had tried to report their crimes. Darnay's uncle had kidnapped and raped a peasant girl. Her brother, first hiding his remaining younger sister, had gone to confront the uncle, who ran him through with his sword. In spite of the best efforts of Dr. Manette, both the elder sister and the brother died. Dr. Manette's manuscript concludes by denouncing the Evrémondes, "them and their descendants, to the last of their race."[9] The jury takes that as irrefutable proof of Darnay's guilt, and he is condemned to die by the guillotine the next afternoon.

In the Defarges' wine shop, Carton discovers that Madame Defarge is the surviving sister of the peasant family, and he overhears her planning to denounce Lucie and her daughter. He visits Lorry and warns him that Lucie and her family must be ready to flee the next day. He extracts a promise that they will be waiting for him at 2 pm, ready to leave the instant he returns.

Shortly before the executions are due to begin, Carton puts his plan into effect. With Barsad's reluctant assistance, he gains access to Darnay's prison cell. Carton drugs his lookalike and trades places with him. Then he has Barsad carry Darnay out to the carriage, where Lorry and the family are awaiting Carton. They flee to England with Darnay.

Meanwhile, Madame Defarge goes to Lucie's lodgings, hoping to apprehend her and her daughter. There she finds Miss Pross, who is waiting for Jerry so they can follow the family out of Paris. The two women struggle and Madame Defarge's pistol discharges, killing her and permanently deafening Miss Pross.

As Carton waits to board the tumbril that will take him to his execution, he is approached by another prisoner, a seamstress. Carton comforts her, telling her that their ends will be quick and that the worries of their lives will not follow them into "the better land where ... [they] will be mercifully sheltered." A final prophetic thought runs through his mind in which he visualises a better future for the family and their descendants.

Dickens closes with Carton's final prophetic vision as he contemplates the guillotine:[10]

I see Barsad, and Cly, Defarge, The Vengeance [a lieutenant of Madame Defarge], the Juryman, the Judge, long ranks of the new oppressors who have risen on the destruction of the old, perishing by this retributive instrument, before it shall cease out of its present use. I see a beautiful city and a brilliant people rising from this abyss, and, in their struggles to be truly free, in their triumphs and defeats, through long years to come, I see the evil of this time and of the previous time of which this is the natural birth, gradually making expiation for itself and wearing out.

I see the lives for which I lay down my life, peaceful, useful, prosperous and happy, in that England which I shall see no more. I see Her with a child upon her bosom, who bears my name. I see her father, aged and bent, but otherwise restored, and faithful to all men in his healing office, and at peace. I see the good old man [Lorry], so long their friend, in ten years' time enriching them with all he has, and passing tranquilly to his reward.

I see that I hold a sanctuary in their hearts, and in the hearts of their descendants, generations hence. I see her, an old woman, weeping for me on the anniversary of this day. I see her and her husband, their course done, lying side by side in their last earthly bed, and I know that each was not more honoured and held sacred in the other's soul than I was in the souls of both.

I see that child who lay upon her bosom and who bore my name, a man winning his way up in that path of life which once was mine. I see him winning it so well, that my name is made illustrious there by the light of his. I see the blots I threw upon it, faded away. I see him, fore-most of just judges and honoured men, bringing a boy of my name, with a forehead that I know and golden hair, to this place—then fair to look upon, with not a trace of this day's disfigurement—and I hear him tell the child my story, with a tender and a faltering voice.

It is a far, far better thing that I do, than I have ever done; it is a far, far better rest that I go to than I have ever known.

Characters

In order of appearance:

Book the First (November 1775)

Chapter 2

Jerry Cruncher: Porter and messenger for Tellson's Bank and secret "Resurrection Man" (body-snatcher); though rough and abusive towards his wife, he provides courageous service to the Manettes in Book the Third. His first name is short for Jeremiah; the latter name shares a meaning with the name of Jarvis Lorry.
Jarvis Lorry: A manager at Tellson's Bank: "...a gentleman of 60 ... Very orderly and methodical he looked ... He had a good leg, and was a little vain of it..." He is a dear friend of Dr. Manette and serves as a sort of trustee and guardian of the Manette family. The bank places him in charge of the Paris branch during the Revolution, putting him in position to provide life-saving service to the Manettes in Book the Third. The end of the book reveals that he lives to be 88.

Chapter 4

Lucie Manette: Daughter of Dr. Manette; an ideal pre-Victorian lady, perfect in every way. About 17 when the novel begins, she is described as short and slight with a "pretty figure, a quantity of golden hair, a pair of blue eyes..." Although Sydney Carton is in love with her, he declares himself an unsuitable candidate for her hand in marriage and instead she marries Charles Darnay, with whom she is very much in love, and bears him a daughter. However, Lucie genuinely cares about Carton's welfare and defends him when he is criticised by others. She is the "golden thread" after whom Book the Second is named, so called because she holds her father's and her family's lives together (and because of her blonde hair like her mother's). She also ties nearly every character in the book together.[11]

Chapter 5

Monsieur Defarge: Given name Ernest, he is the owner of a Paris wine shop and leader of the Jacquerie. "A bull-necked, martial-looking man of thirty ... He was a dark man altogether, with good eyes and a good bold breadth between them." He is devoted to Dr. Manette, having been his servant as a youth. One of the key Revolutionary leaders, in which he is known as Jacques Four, he embraces the Revolution as a noble cause, unlike many other revolutionaries. Though he truly believes in the principles of the Revolution, Defarge is far more moderate than some of the other participants (notably his wife).
Madame Defarge: Given name Thérèse; a vengeful Revolutionary, she is arguably the novel's antagonist and is presented as a more extreme and bloodthirsty personality than her husband Ernest. "There were many women at that time, upon whom the time laid a dreadfully disfiguring hand; but, there was not one among them more to be dreaded than this ruthless woman ... Of a strong and fearless character, of shrewd sense and readiness, of great determination, of that kind of beauty which not only seems to impart to its possessor firmness and animosity, but to strike into others an instinctive recognition of those qualities." The source of her implacable hatred of the Evrémonde family is revealed late in the novel to be the rape of her sister and killing of her brother when she was a child.
Jacques One, Two, and Three: Revolutionary compatriots of Ernest Defarge. Jacques Three is especially bloodthirsty and serves as a juryman on the Revolutionary Tribunals.

Chapter 6

Dr. Alexandre Manette: Lucie's father; when the book opens, he has just been released after a ghastly 18 years as a prisoner in the Bastille. Weak, afraid of sudden noises, barely able to carry on a conversation, he is taken in by his faithful former servant Defarge who then turns him over to Jarvis Lorry and the daughter he has never met. He achieves recovery and contentment with her, her eventual husband Charles Darnay, and their little daughter. All his happiness is put at risk in Book the Third when Madame Defarge resolves to send Evrémonde/Darnay to the guillotine, regardless of his having renounced the Evrémondes' wealth and cruelty. At the same time, the reader learns the cause of Dr. Manette's imprisonment: he had rendered medical care to Madame Defarge's brother and sister following the injuries inflicted on them by the Evrémonde twins back in 1757; the Evrémondes decided he couldn't be allowed to expose them.

Book the Second (Five years later)

Chapter 1

Mrs. Cruncher: Wife of Jerry Cruncher. She is a very religious woman, but her husband, somewhat paranoid, claims she is praying (what he calls "flopping") against him, and that is why he does not often succeed at work. Jerry often verbally and, almost as often, physically abuses her, but at the end of the story, he appears to feel somewhat guilty about this.
Young Jerry Cruncher: Son of Jerry and Mrs. Cruncher. Young Jerry often follows his father around to his father's odd jobs, and at one point in the story, follows his father at night and discovers that his father is a Resurrection Man. Young Jerry looks up to his father as a role model and aspires to become a Resurrection Man himself when he grows up.

Chapter 2

Charles Darnay: A Frenchman of the noble Evrémonde family; "...a young man of about five-and-twenty, well-grown and well-looking, with a sunburnt cheek and a dark eye." When introduced, he is on trial for his life at the Old Bailey on charges of spying on behalf of the French crown. In disgust at the cruelty of his family to the French peasantry, he took on the name "Darnay" (after his mother's maiden name, D'Aulnais) and left France for England.[12] He and Lucie Manette fall deeply in love, they marry, and she gives birth to a daughter. He exhibits an admirable honesty in his decision to reveal to Dr. Manette his true identity as a member of the infamous Evrémonde family. He puts his family's happiness at risk with his courageous decision to return to Paris to save the imprisoned Gabelle, who, unbeknownst to him, has been coerced into luring him there. Once in Paris, he is stunned to discover that, regardless of his rejection of his family's exploitative and abusive record, he is imprisoned incommunicado simply for being an aristocrat. Released after the testimony of Dr. Manette, he is re-arrested and sentenced to be guillotined owing to Madame Defarge's undying hatred of all Evrémondes. This death sentence provides the pretext for the novel's climax.

Chapter 3

John Barsad (real name Solomon Pross): An informer in London and later employed by the Marquis St. Evrémonde. When introduced at Charles Darnay's trial, he is giving damning evidence against the defendant but it becomes clear to the reader that he is an oily, untrustworthy character. Moving to Paris he takes service as a police spy in the Saint Antoine district, under the French monarchy. Following the Revolution, he becomes an agent for Revolutionary France (at which point he must hide his British identity). Although a man of low character, his position as a spy allows him to arrange for Sydney Carton's final heroic act (after Carton blackmails him with revealing his duplicity).
Roger Cly: Barsad's collaborator in spying and giving questionable testimony. Following his chaotic funeral procession in Book the Second, Chapter 14, his coffin is dug up by Jerry Cruncher and his fellow Resurrection Men. In Book the Third, Jerry Cruncher reveals that in fact the casket contained only rocks and that Cly was clearly still alive and no doubt carrying on his spying activities.
Mr Stryver: An ambitious barrister, senior partner to Sydney Carton.[13] "... a man of little more than thirty, but looking twenty years older than he was, stout, loud, red, bluff, and free from any drawback of delicacy..."; he wants to marry Lucie Manette because he believes that she is attractive enough. However, he is not truly in love with her and in fact treats her condescendingly. Jarvis Lorry suggests that marrying Lucie would be unwise and Stryver, after thinking it over, talks himself out of it, later marrying a rich widow instead.
Sydney Carton: A quick-minded and highly intelligent but depressed English barrister, referred to by Dickens as "The Jackal" because of his deference to Stryver. When introduced, he is a hard-drinking cynic, having watched Stryver advance while never taking advantage of his own considerable gifts: Dickens writes that the sun rose "upon no sadder sight than the man of good abilities and good emotions, incapable of their directed exercise, incapable of his own help and his own happiness, sensible to the blight on him, and resigning himself to let it eat him away." In love with Lucie Manette, she cares about him but more as a concerned mother figure than a potential mate. He ultimately becomes a selfless hero, redeeming everything by sacrificing his life for a worthy cause.

Chapter 6

Miss Pross: Lucie Manette's governess since Lucie was 10 years old: "... one of those unselfish creatures—found only among women—who will, for pure love and admiration, bind themselves willing slaves, to youth when they have lost it, to beauty that they never had..." She is fiercely loyal to Lucie and to England. She believes her long-lost brother Solomon, now the spy and perjurer John Barsad, is "the one man worthy of Ladybird," ignoring the fact that he "was a heartless scoundrel who had stripped her of everything she possessed, as a stake to speculate with, and had abandoned her in her poverty for evermore..." She is not afraid to physically fight those she believes are endangering the people she loves. She permanently loses her hearing when the fatal pistol shot goes off during her climactic fight with Madame Defarge.

Chapter 7

It took four men, all four a-blaze with gorgeous decoration, and the Chief of them unable to exist with fewer than two gold watches in his pocket, emulative of the noble and chaste fashion set by Monseigneur, to conduct the happy chocolate to Monseigneur's lips.

It was impossible for Monseigneur to dispense with one of these attendants on the chocolate and hold his high place under the admiring Heavens. Deep would have been the blot upon his escutcheon if his chocolate had been ignobly waited on by only three men; he must have died of two.

And who among the company at Monseigneur's reception in that seventeen hundred and eightieth year of our Lord, could possibly doubt, that a system rooted in a frizzled hangman, powdered, gold-laced, pumped, and white-silk stockinged, would see the very stars out!

"Monseigneur": An unnamed generic aristocrat whose extraordinary decadence and self-absorption, described in detail, are used by Dickens to characterise the ancien régime in general. "The leprosy of unreality disfigured every human creature in attendance upon Monseigneur." His fellow nobles also luxuriate in vast wealth, but this does not inoculate them from feeling envy and resentment: as the Marquis St. Evrémonde leaves Monseigneur's house "with his hat under his arm and his snuff-box in his hand", he turns to the latter's bedroom and quietly says, "I devote you ... to the Devil!" When the Revolution begins, Monseigneur puts on his cook's clothing and ignominiously flees, escaping with only his life.
Marquis St. Evrémonde:[14] Uncle of Charles Darnay: "...a man of about sixty, handsomely dressed, haughty in manner, and with a face like a fine mask." Determined to preserve the traditional prerogatives of the nobility until the end of his life, he is the twin brother of Charles Darnay's late father; both men were exceptionally arrogant and cruel to peasants. Lamenting reforms which have imposed some restraints on the abusive powers of his class, the Marquis is out of favour at the royal court at the time of his assassination. Murdered in his bed by the peasant Gaspard.
Gaspard: A peasant whose child is run over and killed by the Marquis St. Evrémonde's carriage. He plunges a knife into Evrémonde's heart, pinning a note that reads, "Drive him fast to his tomb," a reference to the careless speed that caused his little child's death. After being in hiding for a year, he is found, arrested, and executed.
The Mender of Roads: A peasant who later works as a woodsawyer; the Defarges bring him into a conspiracy against the aristocracy, where he is referred to as Jacques Five.

Chapter 8

Théophile Gabelle: Gabelle is "the Postmaster, and some other taxing functionary, united"[15] for the tenants of the Marquis St. Evrémonde. Gabelle is imprisoned by the revolutionaries, and his beseeching letter brings Darnay to France. Gabelle is "named after the hated salt tax".[16]

Book the Third (Autumn 1792)

Chapter 3

The Vengeance: A companion of Madame Defarge referred to as her "shadow" and lieutenant, a member of the sisterhood of women revolutionaries in Saint Antoine, and Revolutionary zealot. (Many Frenchmen and women did change their names to show their enthusiasm for the Revolution.[17]) Carton predicts that the Vengeance, Defarge, Cly, and Barsad will be consumed by the Revolution and end up on the guillotine.

Chapter 13

The Seamstress: "...a young woman, with a slight girlish form, a sweet spare face in which there was no vestige of colour, and large widely opened patient eyes..." Having been caught up in The Terror, she strikes up a conversation with the man she assumes is Evrémonde in the large room where the next day's guillotine victims are gathered. When she realises that another man has taken Charles Darnay's place, she admires his sacrifice and asks if she can hold his hand during their tumbril ride to the place of execution.

Sources

While performing in The Frozen Deep, Dickens was given a play to read called The Dead Heart by Watts Phillips which had the historical setting, the basic storyline, and the climax that Dickens used in A Tale of Two Cities.[18] The play was produced while A Tale of Two Cities was being serialised in All the Year Round and led to talk of plagiarism.[19]

Other sources are The French Revolution: A History by Thomas Carlyle (especially important for the novel's rhetoric and symbolism);[20] Zanoni by Edward Bulwer-Lytton; The Castle Spector by Matthew Lewis; Travels in France by Arthur Young; and Tableau de Paris by Louis-Sébastien Mercier. Dickens also used material from an account of imprisonment during the Terror by Beaumarchais, and records of the trial of a French spy published in The Annual Register.[21]

Research published in The Dickensian in 1963 suggests that the house at 1 Greek Street, now The House of St Barnabas, forms the basis for Dr. Manette and Lucie's London house.[22]

In a building at the back, attainable by a courtyard where a plane tree rustled its green leaves, church organs claimed to be made, and likewise gold to be beaten by some mysterious giant who had a golden arm starting out of the wall ... as if he had beaten himself precious.[23]

The "golden arm" (an arm-and-hammer symbol, an ancient sign of the gold-beater's craft) is now housed at the Charles Dickens Museum, but a modern replica could be seen sticking out of the wall near the Pillars of Hercules pub at the western end of Manette Street (formerly Rose Street),[24] until this building was demolished in 2017.

Publication history

The 45-chapter novel was published in 31 weekly instalments in Dickens's new literary periodical titled All the Year Round. From April to November 1859, Dickens also republished the chapters as eight monthly sections in green covers. All but three of Dickens's previous novels had appeared as monthly instalments prior to publication as books. The first weekly instalment of A Tale of Two Cities ran in the first issue of All the Year Round on 30 April 1859. The last ran 30 weeks later, on 26 November.[1]

The Telegraph and The Guardian claim that it is one of the best-selling novels of all time.[2][3][25] WorldCat listed 1,529 editions of the work, including 1,305 print editions.[26]

Analysis

A Tale of Two Cities is one of Dickens' two works of historical fiction (with Barnaby Rudge).[27]

Dickens uses literal translations of French idioms for characters who cannot speak English, such as "What the devil do you do in that galley there?!!" and "Where is my wife? … Here you see me."[28] The Penguin Classics edition of the novel notes that "Not all readers have regarded the experiment as a success."[28]

J. L. Borges quipped: "Dickens lived in London. In his book A Tale of Two Cities, based on the French Revolution, we see that he really could not write a tale of two cities. He was a resident of just one city: London."[29]

In the Introduction to the Encyclopedia of Adventure Fiction, critic Don D'Ammassa argues that it is an adventure novel because the protagonists are in constant danger of imprisonment or death.[30]

Opening lines

Pairs of contrasting words in the opening lines have been interpreted to illustrate the social disparities between the French bourgeoisie and aristocracy around the time of the French Revolution.[31] They may also act as a precursor to the book's theme of doubles.[32]

Autobiographical material

Lucie Manette may reflect Dickens's relationship with eighteen-year-old actress Ellen Ternan, concerning which little is known for certain. The character has been noted as resembling Ternan physically.[33]

After starring in a play by Wilkie Collins titled The Frozen Deep, Dickens was inspired to write Two Cities. In the play, Dickens played the part of a man who sacrifices his own life so that his rival may have the woman they both love; that love triangle became the basis for the relationships among Charles Darnay, Lucie Manette, and Sydney Carton.[34]

Sydney Carton and Charles Darnay may bear importantly on Dickens's personal life. The plot hinges on the near-perfect resemblance between Sydney Carton and Charles Darnay; the two look so alike that Carton twice saves Darnay through others' inability  to tell them apart. Carton is Darnay made bad. Carton suggests as much:

'Do you particularly like the man [Darnay]?' he muttered, at his own image [which he is regarding in a mirror]; 'why should you particularly like a man who resembles you? There is nothing in you to like; you know that. Ah, confound you! What a change you have made in yourself! A good reason for talking to a man, that he shows you what you have fallen away from and what you might have been! Change places with him, and would you have been looked at by those blue eyes [belonging to Lucie Manette] as he was, and commiserated by that agitated face as he was? Come on, and have it out in plain words! You hate the fellow.'[35]

Charles Darnay shared Dickens' initials, a frequent property of his characters.[36] Darnay's ambiguous fate may have been a reflection of Dickens' own insecurities.[37]

Dickens dedicated the book to Whig and Liberal prime minister Lord John Russell: "In remembrance of many public services and private kindnesses."[38]

Contemporary criticisms

The reports published in the press were divergent. Thomas Carlyle was enthusiastic, which made the author "heartily delighted".[39] On the other hand, Mrs. Oliphant found "little of Dickens" in the novel.[40] The critic James Fitzjames Stephen called it a "dish of puppy pie and stewed cat which is not disguised by the cooking" and  "a disjointed framework for the display of the tawdry wares, which are Mr Dickens's stock-in-trade".[41]

Adaptations

Films

A Tale of Two Cities, a 1911 silent film.
A Tale of Two Cities, a 1917 silent film.
A Tale of Two Cities, a 1922 silent film.
The Only Way, a 1927 silent British film directed by Herbert Wilcox.
A Tale of Two Cities, a 1935 black-and-white film starring Ronald Colman, Elizabeth Allan, Reginald Owen, Basil Rathbone, and Edna May Oliver, nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture.
A Tale of Two Cities, a 1958 version, starring Dirk Bogarde, Dorothy Tutin, Christopher Lee, Leo McKern, and Donald Pleasence.
A Tale of Two Cities, a 1980 version, starring Chris Sarandon, Alice Krige and Kenneth More.

Radio

On 8 April 1935, WCAE in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, presented A Tale of Two Cities "in chapter sequence" on Monday nights.[42]
On 25 July 1938, The Mercury Theatre on the Air produced a radio adaptation starring Orson Welles. Welles also starred in a version broadcast on Lux Radio Theater on 26 March 1945.
Ronald Colman recreated his 1935 film role three times on radio: twice on the Lux Radio Theatre, first on 12 January 1942 with Edna Best and again on 18 March 1946 with Heather Angel, and once on the 9 March 1948 broadcast of Favorite Story (director Cecil B. DeMille's "favorite story").
On 7 October 1943, a portion of the novel was adapted to the syndicated programme The Weird Circle as "Dr. Manette's Manuscript."
In 1950, the BBC broadcast a radio adaptation by Terence Rattigan and John Gielgud of their unproduced 1935 stage play.
A half-hour version titled "Sydney Carton" was broadcast on 27 March 1954 on Theatre Royal hosted by and starring Laurence Olivier.
In June 1989, BBC Radio 4 produced a seven-hour drama adapted for radio by Nick McCarty and directed by Ian Cotterell. This adaptation has been occasionally repeated by BBC Radio 7 and later BBC Radio 4 Extra (most recently in 2009). The cast included Charles Dance as Sydney Carton, Maurice Denham as Dr. Manette, Richard Pasco as Mr Lorry, John Moffatt as Marquis St. Evrémonde, Charlotte Attenborough as Lucie Manette, John Duttine as Darnay, Aubrey Woods as Mr Stryver and Barbara Leigh-Hunt as Miss Pross.[43] BBC Radio 4 produced a new five-part adaptation for radio by Mike Walker with original music by Lennert Busch and directed by Jessica Dromgoole and Jeremy Mortimer[44] which won the 2012 Bronze Sony Radio Academy Award for Best Drama.[45] The cast included Robert Lindsay as the voice of Charles Dickens, Paul Ready as Sydney Carton, Karl Johnson as Dr. Manette, Lydia Wilson as Lucie Manette, Jonathan Coy as Mr Lorry, Andrew Scott as Darnay, Alison Steadman as Miss Pross and Clive Merrison as Marquis St. Evrémonde.
In 2018, A Tale of Two Cities: Aleppo and London, a three-part adaptation of the Dickens novel written by Ayeesha Menon and directed by Polly Thomas was broadcast on BBC Radio 4, updating the story and characters to set it in modern-day London and war-torn Syria.[46] The cast included Shaun Parker as Sid (Sydney Carton), Lara Sawalha as Lina (Lucie Manette), Fatima Adoum as Taghreed (Madame Defarge), Phil Davis as Jarvis (Mr Lorry), Khalid Abdalla as Shwan Dahkurdi (Charles Darnay) and Nadim Sawalha as Dr. Mahmoud (Dr. Manette).

Television

ABC produced a two-part mini-series in 1953.[47]
The BBC produced an eight-part mini-series in 1957 starring Peter Wyngarde as Sydney Carton, Edward de Souza as Charles Darnay and Wendy Hutchinson as Lucie Manette.
The BBC produced a ten-part mini-series in 1965 starring John Wood as Carton, Nicholas Pennell as Charles Darnay, Kika Markham as Lucie Manette and Patrick Troughton as Dr. Manette.[48]
The BBC produced another eight-part mini-series in 1980 starring Paul Shelley as Carton/Darnay, Sally Osborne as Lucie Manette and Nigel Stock as Jarvis Lorry.
A Tale of Two Cities, a 1984 TV animated version by Burbank Animation Studios.[49]
ITV Granada produced a two-part mini-series in 1989 starring James Wilby as Sydney Carton, Xavier Deluc as Charles Darnay and Serena Gordon as Lucie Manette. The production also aired on Masterpiece Theatre on PBS in the United States.[50][51]

Stage productions

Henry Irving's Lyceum Theatre company: The Only Way (1899), John Martin-Harvey as Sidney Carton
Royal & Derngate Theatre produced an adaptation by Mike Poulton with original music by Rachel Portman, directed by James Dacre.
The Regent's Park Open Air Theatre staged an adaptation by Matthew Dunster in 2017, directed by artistic director Timothy Sheader.

Stage musicals

Stage musical adaptations of the novel include:

Two Cities, the Spectacular New Musical (1968), with music by Jeff Wayne, lyrics by Jerry Wayne and starring Edward Woodward.[52]
A Tale of Two Cities (1998), with music by David Pomeranz and book by Steven David Horwich and David Soames. The musical was commissioned by Paul Nicholas and co-produced by Bill Kenwright ran at the New Alexandra Theatre in Birmingham during their 1998 Christmas season with Paul Nicholas as Sydney Carton.
Two Cities (2006), a musical by Howard Goodall, which was set during the Russian Revolution, with the two cities being London and St. Petersburg.
A Tale of Two Cities, a musical by Jill Santoriello, which opened on Broadway at the Al Hirschfeld Theatre on 18 September 2008.  The production starred James Barbour as Sydney Carton, Natalie Toro as Madame Defarge and Brandi Burkhardt as Lucie Manette. The show was directed and choreographed by Warren Carlyle. Since Broadway, the show has been performed in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, Germany, Japan and Korea.[53]

Opera

Arthur Benjamin's operatic version of the novel, subtitled Romantic Melodrama in Six Scenes, premiered on 17 April 1953, conducted by the composer. It received its stage premiere at Sadler's Wells on 22 July 1957, under the baton of Leon Lovett.[54]

Popular culture

A Tale of Two Cities served as an inspiration to the 2012 Batman film The Dark Knight Rises by Christopher Nolan.  The character of Bane is in part inspired by Dickens's Madame Defarge: He organises kangaroo court trials against the ruling elite of the city of Gotham and is seen knitting in one of the trial scenes like Madame Defarge. One of Bane's associates later put on trial is also named Mr. Stryver. There are other hints to Dickens's novel, such as Talia al Ghul being obsessed with revenge and having a close relationship to the hero, and Bane's catchphrase "the fire rises" as an ode to one of the book's chapters.[55] Bane's associate Barsard is named after a supporting character in the novel. In the film's final scene, Jim Gordon (Gary Oldman) reads aloud the closing lines of Sydney Carton’s inner monologue—"It's a far far better thing I do than I have ever done, it's a far far better rest I go to than I have ever known"—directly from the novel.[56]

References

^ a b "Facsimile of the original 1st publication of "A Tale of Two Cities" in All the year round". S4ulanguages.com. Retrieved 5 January 2013.

^ a b "Charles Dickens novel inscribed to George Eliot up for sale". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 September 2019.

^ a b "A Tale of Two Cities, King's Head, review". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 7 September 2019.

^ "TLSWikipedia all-conquering – The TLS". 26 May 2016. Archived from the original on 26 May 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2021.

^ "The Big Read" Archived 9 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine. BBC. April 2003. Retrieved 26 July 2019

^ Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities, Book the First, Chapter I.

^ Dickens 2003, p. 128 (Book 2, Chapter 9). This statement [citation needed] (about the roof) is truer than the Marquis knows, and another example of foreshadowing: the Evrémonde château is burned down by revolting peasants in book 2, chapter 23.

^ Dickens 2003, p. 159 (book 2, chapter 14)

^ Dickens 2003, p. 344 (Book 3, Chapter 10)

^ Dickens 2003, p. 390 (Book 3, Chapter 15)

^ Dickens 2003, p. 83 (Book 2, Chapter 4)

^ After Dr. Manette's letter is read, Darnay says that "It was the always-vain endeavour to discharge my poor mother's trust, that first brought my fatal presence near you." (Dickens 2003, p. 347 [Book 3, Chapter 11].) Darnay seems to be referring to the time when his mother brought him, still a child, to her meeting with Dr. Manette in Book 3, Chapter 10. But some readers also feel that Darnay is explaining why he changed his name and travelled to England in the first place: to discharge his family's debt to Dr. Manette without fully revealing his identity. (See note to the Penguin Classics edition: Dickens 2003, p. 486.)

^ Stryver, like Carton, is a barrister and not a solicitor; Dickens 2003, p. xi

^ Also called "The Younger", having inherited the title at "the Elder"'s death, the Marquis is sometimes referred to as "Monseigneur the Marquis St. Evrémonde". He is not so called in this article because the title "Monseigneur" applies to whoever among a group is of the highest status; thus, this title sometimes applies to the Marquis and other times does not.

^ Dickens 2003, p. 120 (Book 2, Chapter 8)

^ Dickens 2003, p. 462

^ Dickens 2003, p. 470

^ Dickens by Peter Ackroyd; Harper Collins, 1990, p. 777

^ Dickens by Peter Ackroyd; Harper Collins, 1990, p. 859

^ Dickens, Charles (1970) [1859]. Woodcock, George (ed.). A tale of Two Cities. Illust. by Hablot L. Browne. Penguin Books. pp. 408, 410; n. 30, 41. ISBN 0140430547.

^ Dickens by Peter Ackroyd; Harper Collins, 1990, pp. 858–862

^ Chesters & Hampshire, Graeme & David (2013). London's Secret Places. Bath, England: Survival Books. pp. 22–23.

^ A Tale of Two Cities, Charles Dickens

^ Richard Jones. Walking Dickensian London. New Holland Publishers, 2004. ISBN 9781843304838. p. 88.

^ Thonemann, Peter (25 May 2016). "The all-conquering Wikipedia?". the-tls.co.uk. Retrieved 29 May 2016. This figure of 200 million is – to state the obvious – pure fiction. Its ultimate source is unknown: perhaps a hyperbolic 2005 press release for a Broadway musical adaptation of Dickens' novel. But the presence of this canard on Wikipedia had, and continues to have, a startling influence. Since 2008, the claim has been recycled repeatedly…

^ "Results for 'ti:A Tale of Two Cities au:Charles Dickens' > 'Charles Dickens' [WorldCat.org]". www.worldcat.org. Retrieved 26 July 2022.

^ "www.dickensfellowship.org, 'Dickens as a Fiction Writer'". Retrieved 1 January 2015.

^ a b Dickens, Charles (2003). A Tale of Two Cities (Revised ed.). London: Penguin Books Ltd. pp. 31, 55. ISBN 978-0-141-43960-0.

^ Borges, Jorge Luis (31 July 2013). Professor Borges: A Course on English Literature. New Directions Publishing. p. 159 – via Internet Archive.

^ Done D'Ammassa, Encyclopedia of Adventure Fiction. Facts on File Library of World Literature, Infobase Publishing, 2009. pp. vii–viii.

^ Kumarasamy MA, Esper GJ, Bornstein WA (September 2017). "Commentary on an Excerpt From A Tale of Two Cities". Acad Med. 92 (9): 1249. doi:10.1097/01.ACM.0000524672.21238.b6. PMID 28857922.

^ Gallagher, Catherine (1983). "The Duplicity of Doubling in "A Tale of Two Cities"". Dickens Studies Annual. 12: 125–145. ISSN 0084-9812. JSTOR 44371733.

^ Dickens 2003, p. xxi

^ "Context of A Tale of Two Cities". Retrieved 3 August 2009.

^ Dickens 2003, p. 89 (Book 2, Chapter 4) p. 89

^ Schlicke 2008, p. 53

^ Court, Franklin E (Fall 1991). "A Tale of Two Cities: Dickens, Revolution, and the "Other" C_D_". Victorian Newsletter (80): 14–18.

^ Dickens, Charles (1866), A Tale of Two Cities (First ed.), London: Chapman and Hall, p. iii, retrieved 6 July 2019

^ Charles Dickens, Letters, "Letter to Thomas Carlyle, 30 October 1859.

^ Margaret Oliphant," Review of A Tale of Two Cities, Blackwood's, No. 109, 1871.

^ James Fitzjames Stephen, Saturday Review, 17 December 1859.

^ Hamilton, Jane (8 April 1935). "Dickens Radio Revival Tale of Two Cities WAE Presentation". Pittsburgh Sun-Telegraph. p. 16. Retrieved 9 May 2022 – via Newspapers.com.

^ "BBC – Radio 4 – Dickens Bicentenary". www.bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 26 July 2022.

^ Dromgoole, Jessica. "A Tale of Two Cities on BBC Radio 4. And a podcast too!".

^ "Sony Radio Academy Award Winners". The Guardian. 15 May 2012. Retrieved 12 March 2014.

^ "A Tale of Two Cities: Aleppo and London" Archived 30 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine. BBC. Retrieved 30 April 2020

^ chasmilt777 (10 August 2006). ""The Plymouth Playhouse" A Tale of Two Cities: Part 1 (TV Episode 1953)". IMDb.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link)

^ "A Tale of Two Cities: Episode 1". 11 April 1965. p. 17 – via BBC Genome.

^ "A Tale of Two Cities". 8 June 1984. Retrieved 26 July 2022 – via IMDb.

^ New York Magazine, 23 Sep 1991, p. 176, at Google Books

^ Jack Goldstein and Isabella Reese 101 Amazing Facts about Charles Dickens, p. 11, at Google Books

^ The Encyclopedia of the Musical Theatre, Volume 1. Schirmer Books. 1994. p. 358.

^ BWW News Desk. "A Tale of Two Cities Adds Two Performances at Birdland". BroadwayWorld.com. Retrieved 23 December 2018.

^ "A Tale of Two Cities (1949–50)". Boosey & Hawkes. Retrieved 12 March 2014.

^ "Christopher Nolan on The Dark Knight Rises ' Literary Inspiration". ComingSoon.net. 8 July 2012. Retrieved 29 December 2017.

^ "The Dark Knight Rises". Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 30 April 2020.

Works cited

A Tale of Two Cities Shmoop: Study Guides & Teacher Resources. Web. 12 March 2014.
Biedermann, Hans. Dictionary of Symbolism. New York: Meridian (1994) ISBN 978-0-452-01118-2
Dickens, Charles. A Tale of Two Cities. Edited and with an introduction and notes by Richard Maxwell. London: Penguin Classics (2003) ISBN 978-0-14-143960-0
Drabble, Margaret, ed. The Oxford Companion to English Literature. 5th ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press (1985) ISBN 0-19-866130-4
Forster, E. M. Aspects of the Novel (1927). 2005 reprint: London: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-144169-6
Orwell, George. "Charles Dickens". In A Collection of Essays. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich (1946) ISBN 0-15-618600-4
Rabkin, Eric. Masterpieces of the Imaginative Mind: Literature's Most Fantastic Works. Chantilly, VA: The Teaching Company (2007)
Schlicke, Paul. Coffee With Dickens. London: Duncan Baird Publishers (2008) ISBN 978-1-84483-608-6
A Tale of Two Cities: Character List SparkNotes: Today's Most Popular Study Guides. Web. 11 April 2011.
Ackroyd, Peter. Dickens. London: HarperCollins (1990). ISBN 0-06-016602-9.

Further reading

Alleyn, Susanne. The Annotated A Tale of Two Cities. Albany, New York: Spyderwort Press (2014) ISBN 978-1535397438
Glancy, Ruth. Charles Dickens' A Tale of Two Cities: A Sourcebook. London: Routledge (2006) ISBN 978-0-415-28760-9
Sanders, Andrew. The Companion to A Tale of Two Cities. London: Unwin Hyman (1989) ISBN 978-0-04-800050-7 Out of print.

External links

A Tale of Two Cities at Standard Ebooks

 A Tale of Two Cities at Project Gutenberg
'Dickens: A Tale of Two Cities', lecture by Dr. Tony Williams on the writing of the book, at Gresham College on 3 July 2007 (with video and audio files available for download, as well as the transcript).
 A Tale of Two Cities public domain audiobook at LibriVox

vte

Bibliography

The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club (1836–1837)
Oliver Twist; or, The Parish Boy's Progress (1837–1839)
Nicholas Nickleby (1838–1839)
The Old Curiosity Shop (1840–1841)
Barnaby Rudge: A Tale of the Riots of Eighty (1841)
The Life and Adventures of Martin Chuzzlewit (1843–1844)
Dombey and Son (1846–1848)
Characters
David Copperfield (1849–1850)
Bleak House (1852–1853)
Hard Times: For These Times (1854)
Little Dorrit (1855–1857)
A Tale of Two Cities (1859)
Great Expectations (1860–1861)
Our Mutual Friend (1864–1865)
The Mystery of Edwin Drood (1870)

Characters

A Christmas Carol (1843)
The Chimes (1844)
The Cricket on the Hearth (1845)
The Battle of Life (1846)
The Haunted Man and the Ghost's Bargain (1848)

"To Be Read at Dusk" (1852)
"The Long Voyage" (1853)
"The Signal-Man" (1866)
"The Trial for Murder" (1865)

Sketches by Boz (1833–1836)
The Mudfog Papers (1837–1838)
Master Humphrey's Clock (1840–1841)

American Notes for General Circulation (1842)
Pictures from Italy (1846)
The Life of Our Lord (1846–1849)
A Child's History of England (1851–1853)
The Uncommercial Traveller (1860–1861)
Letters (1821–1870)

The Frozen Deep (1856)
No Thoroughfare (1867)

Bentley's Miscellany (1836–1838)
Master Humphrey's Clock (1840–1841)
The Daily News (1846–1870)
Household Words (1850–1859)
All the Year Round (1859–1870)

A House to Let (1858)
The Haunted House (1859)
A Message from the Sea (1860)
Mugby Junction (1866)
No Thoroughfare (1867)

John Dickens
Elizabeth Dickens

Frederick Dickens
Alfred Lamert Dickens
Augustus Dickens

Catherine Dickens (wife)
Ellen Ternan (mistress)

Charles Dickens Jr.
Mary Dickens
Kate Perugini
Walter Landor Dickens
Francis Dickens
Alfred D'Orsay Tennyson Dickens
Sydney Smith Haldimand Dickens
Henry Fielding Dickens
Dora Annie Dickens
Edward Dickens

Epitaph of Charles Irving Thornton
Bleak House
Charles Dickens and racism
Tavistock House
Gads Hill Place
Grip (raven)
Dickens fair
Dickens and Little Nell (statue)
Portrait of Charles Dickens (1839 painting)
Portrait of Charles Dickens (1855 painting)
Charles Dickens in His Study (1859 painting)
Dickens of London (1976 miniseries)
Dickens in America (2005 documentary)
The Invisible Woman (2013 film)
Dickensian (2015 TV series)
The Man Who Invented Christmas (2017 film)

Category

vte

Sydney Carton
Lucie Manette
Charles Darnay
Alexandre Manette
Monsieur Ernest Defarge
Madame Defarge
Jarvis Lorry
Miss Pross
Marquis St. Evrémonde
John Barsad
Jerry Cruncher
Stryver
The Seamstress

A Tale of Two Cities (1911)
A Tale of Two Cities (1917)
A Tale of Two Cities (1922)
The Only Way (1927)
A Tale of Two Cities (1935)
A Tale of Two Cities (1958)
A Tale of Two Cities (1980)

Two Cities (2006)
A Tale of Two Cities (2007)

A Tale of Two Cities (1965)
A Tale of Two Cities (1980)
A Tale of Two Cities (1989)

VIAF

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataCzech RepublicIsrael

IdRefMusicBrainz work

