Article 14 of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore, specifically Article 14(1), guarantees to Singapore citizens the rights to freedom of speech and expression, peaceful assembly without arms, and association. However, the enjoyment of these rights may be restricted by laws imposed by the Parliament of Singapore on the grounds stated in Article 14(2) of the Constitution.

There are two types of grounds. For the first type, it must be shown that restricting the rights is "necessary or expedient in the interest" of the grounds. The grounds are the security of Singapore and public order (applicable to all three rights protected by Article 14(1)), morality (freedom of speech and freedom of association), and friendly relations with other countries (freedom of speech only). In a 2005 judgment, the High Court expressed the view that the phrase necessary or expedient confers upon Parliament "an extremely wide discretionary power and remit that permits a multifarious and multifaceted approach towards achieving any of the purposes specified in Art 14(2) of the Constitution". It is unnecessary for the courts to determine whether a legislative restriction of a right is reasonable. All that is required is a nexus between the objective underlying the restrictive law and one of the grounds specified in Article 14(2) that Parliament is entitled to restrict the right on.

The right to free speech is limited on the ground of the security of Singapore by the Official Secrets Act (Cap. 213, 1985 Rev. Ed.), and on the ground of public order by the Broadcasting Act (Cap. 28, 2003 Rev. Ed.) and Newspaper and Printing Presses Act (Cap. 206, 2002 Rev. Ed.). Public order also justifies restrictions on both free speech and assembly imposed by the Sedition Act (Cap. 290, 1985 Rev. Ed.), Public Entertainments and Meetings Act (Cap. 257, 2001 Rev. Ed.) and Public Order Act (Cap. 257A, 2012 Rev. Ed.); and restrictions on the right to freedom of association imposed by the Societies Act (Cap. 311, 1985 Rev. Ed.). Freedom of speech has also been limited on the basis of morality by the Films Act (Cap. 107, 1998 Rev. Ed.), which establishes film censorship and classification regimes; and the Undesirable Publications Act (Cap. 338, 1998 Rev. Ed.), under which obscene or otherwise objectionable publications may be banned.

No necessity or expedience requirement applies to the second type of grounds, which appear in Articles 14(2)(a) (restrictions "designed to protect the privileges of Parliament or to provide against contempt of court, defamation or incitement to any offence") and 14(3) (laws relating to labour or education). At present, it appears that Parliament may restrict Article 14(1) rights on these grounds simply by enacting legislation, and that the courts are not entitled to assess if the restrictions are appropriate. The privileges of Parliament are set out in the Parliament (Privileges, Immunities and Powers) Act (Cap. 217, 2000 Rev. Ed.), and the Singapore courts have held that the common law offence of scandalizing the court (a form of contempt of court) does not violate Article 14(1)(a). The courts have also determined that the traditional common law rules of the tort of defamation strike a proper balance between free speech and the protection of reputation, and have declined to apply a public figure doctrine or responsible journalism as additional defences to the tort.

Article 14(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore[1] was designed to protect the rights to freedom of speech and expression, peaceful assembly without arms, and association. It is subject to Article 14(2) which qualifies these rights. Judicial and statutory limits have been read into the Article, a process which is deemed necessary because the rights to free speech, assembly and association do not exist in a vacuum but jostle with competing interests and counter-values.[2] As was said in Chee Siok Chin v. Ministry of Home Affairs (2005),[3] "[f]reedom of action invariably ends where conflicting rights and/or interests collide".[4]

The text of Article 14, which is entitled "Freedom of speech, assembly and association", is as follows:

14.— (1) Subject to clauses (2) and (3) —

(2) Parliament may by law impose —


(3) Restrictions on the right to form associations conferred by clause (1)(c) may also be imposed by any law relating to labour or education.
Articles 14(1) to (3) are in pari materia with Articles 10(1) to (3) of the Constitution of Malaysia, from which they were adopted following Singapore's independence from Malaysia in 1965.[5] Articles 14(1) and (2) are also somewhat similar to Articles 19(1) to (4) of the Constitution of India.

There is no constitutional right to bear arms in Singapore, as Article 14(1)(b) provides Singapore citizens with "the right to assemble peaceably and without arms". Under the Arms and Explosives Act,[6] no person may possess, import, export, manufacture or deal in any arms or explosives without a licence. It may be that the words and without arms were included in Article 14(1)(b) to ensure that arguments based on the clause in the English Bill of Rights 1689[7] stating that "the Subjects which are Protestants may have Arms for their Defence suitable to their Conditions and as allowed by Law", which inspired the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution ("A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed."), cannot be raised in Singapore.

The freedoms of speech, assembly and association guaranteed by the Constitution are enjoyed only by Singapore citizens. In Review Publishing Co. Ltd. v. Lee Hsien Loong (2009),[8] it was held that the appellant newspaper company did not have the requisite locus standi to rely on the constitutional right of free speech and expression as it was not a Singapore citizen, and Article 14(1)(a) of the Constitution expressly provides that only Singapore citizens are entitled to the right.[9]

The rights guaranteed to the citizens of Singapore by Article 14(1) are subject to restrictions set out in subsection (2) of the same Article. In Chee Siok Chin, Justice V.K. Rajah elucidated the justification for these qualifications:[4]

The right of freedom of expression should never be exercised on the basis that opinions are expressed in hermetically sealed vacuums where only the rights of those who ardently advocate their views matter. That is entirely inappropriate. Freedom of expression when left unchecked may reach a point where protest, criticism and expression culminate in nuisance or something even more serious. The law inevitably has to intervene then.
In 1993 in a statement delivered at the World Conference on Human Rights, the Minister for Foreign Affairs Wong Kan Seng took the position that "order and stability are essential for development" as economic growth requires a stable legal environment protective of contractual and property rights.[10] Excessive focus on civil-political liberties during the early stages of national development would impair this. However, the Government appears to have loosened restrictions on political liberties like free speech over time to manage demands for a more participatory political culture.[11] In fact, citizens were urged by Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong not to be "passive bystanders in their own fate" but to debate issues "with reason, passion and conviction". Wrestling with "honest differences" was to be preferred over being "an apathetic society with no view".[12]

Parliament may impose restrictions on the rights guaranteed by Article 14(1) on two types of grounds. For the first type, it must be shown that restricting the rights is "necessary or expedient in the interest" of the grounds. No such requirement applies to the second type of grounds, which appear in Articles 14(2)(a) and 14(3). At present, it appears that Parliament may restrict Article 14(1) rights on these grounds simply by enacting legislation, and that the courts are not entitled to assess if the restrictions are appropriate.[13][14]

Article 14(2) of the Constitution states that "Parliament may by law impose" restrictions on the rights referred to in Article 14(1). This is arguably in line with Singapore's adoption of the Westminster system of government that rests upon parliamentary supremacy, the rule of law and common law principles.[15] The terms law and written law are defined in Article 2(1) of the Constitution as follows:

In this Constitution, unless it is otherwise provided or the context otherwise requires —

One reading of Article 14(2) is that in order to restrict the rights to freedom of speech, assembly and association, Parliament must impose the restrictions by passing written laws, that is, Acts of Parliament, since it exercises the legislative power of Singapore by passing bills that are assented to by the President.[16] However, in Jeyaretnam Joshua Benjamin v. Lee Kuan Yew (1990),[17] a case involving defamation law, the Court of Appeal took a much broader approach. The Court noted that according to Article 2(1), law in Article 14(2) includes the common law in so far as it is in operation in Singapore. In May 1963, the Parliament of Malaysia had enacted the Malaysia Act 1963,[18] which extended the Defamation Act 1957[19] to Singapore, then a state in the Federation of Malaysia. Since the Act, now the Defamation Act (Cap. 75, 1985 Rev. Ed.), was premised on common law rules of the tort of defamation, the Court held that the Legislature had "clearly intended that the common law relating to defamation, as modified by the Act, should continue to apply in Singapore". Thus, it is "manifestly beyond argument that Art 14(1)(a) is subject to the common law of defamation as modified by the Act".[20]

It has been said that this argument "suffers from two fatal flaws".[21] There is no evidence that the constitutionality of the existing rules of defamation was considered by either the Malaysian or Singapore Parliaments. More significantly, even if the Governments of Malaysia and Singapore had believed these rules to be constitutional, this should not have been treated by the Court of Appeal as decisive as it is the courts' duty to independently determine whether the assumption is justified. Otherwise, a similar argument might be extended to all legislation passed by Parliament, and "[i]t is not difficult to see that this would spell the end of constitutional law itself".[22]

Parliament may restrict the rights to free speech, assembly and association on the grounds set out in the table below if it is "necessary or expedient in the interest" of them:

In Chee Siok Chin, the High Court interpreted the phrase necessary or expedient as conferring upon Parliament "an extremely wide discretionary power and remit that permits a multifarious and multifaceted approach towards achieving any of the purposes specified in Art 14(2) of the Constitution".[13] The Court emphasized the fact that, unlike Article 19(3) of the Constitution of India which provides that the right to fetter the freedom of speech and assembly is subject to the touchstone of reasonableness, Singapore's Article 14(2) does not contain the word reasonable. However, despite the broad power that Article 19(3) accords to the Indian courts, they have been "most reluctant" to invalidate legislation purportedly infringing the rights to free speech or assembly. There exists a strong presumption of legislative constitutionality, as the Supreme Court of India has expressed a need for "judicial self-restraint and extreme caution" when determining whether legislation unreasonably restricts a constitutional right.[23] It has been noted that the Indian courts have thus been used to exemplify how much more deference Singapore courts should give to the Government, and that the Article 14(2) derogation clause was said to confer upon Parliament a great amount of discretionary power.[24]

The High Court also rejected the use of a proportionality analysis when determining the extent of Parliament's powers to impose restrictions on individual rights. The analysis enables the judiciary to assess if an interference with rights is proportionate to a legitimate and important aim of the legislation in question. A court will inquire into whether relevant and sufficient reasons justify the statutory interference, and may substitute its own judgment for that of Parliament. The High Court concluded: "Needless to say, the notion of proportionality has never been part of the common law in relation to the judicial review of the exercise of a legislative and/or an administrative power or discretion. Nor has it ever been part of Singapore law."[25]

Bearing in mind these restraints, the court's only task is to ascertain whether an impugned law is within the purview of any of the permissible restrictions. Hence, all that needs to be established is a nexus between the object of the law in question and one of the permissible subjects stipulated in Article 14(2). In doing so, the Government must merely satisfy the court that there is a factual basis on which Parliament has considered it "necessary or expedient" to restrict one's individual right to freedom of speech, assembly or association.[13][26]

When determining whether legislative restrictions are "in the interest of" the relevant purposes specified in Article 14(2), the courts may examine the impugned statute, relevant parliamentary material and contemporary speeches and documents, and will adopt a "generous and not a pedantic interpretation".[13] Moreover, the term in the interest of, when contrasted with the maintenance of, grants "a much wider legislative remit that allows Parliament to take a prophylactic approach" and includes "laws that are not purely designed or crafted for the immediate or direct maintenance" of the Article 14(2) grounds.[27]

Parliament may restrict the rights to freedom of speech, assembly or association if it is necessary or expedient in the interests of the security of Singapore or any part thereof. The courts have taken a broad approach to this exception, and have shown a considerable amount of deference to the Government. For instance, in Public Prosecutor v. Phua Keng Tong (1986),[28] a case involving the Official Secrets Act,[29] the High Court held that security in Article 14(2) does not merely mean protection from danger but includes the "protection of information which the Government considers vital or essential for its administration".[30] However, not everything that the Government regards as an official secret will be necessarily be deemed to be so by the court, especially if the information is "innocuous in nature". The burden of proving that official information is secret lies on the Prosecution.[31]

Freedom of speech and expression may also be restricted in the interest of friendly relations with other countries. This ground of restriction has not yet been considered by local courts, but might have justified the withdrawal by the Board of Film Censors (BFC) of a certificate issued for the film Zoolander (2001) with effect from 8 February 2002.[32] The film, a comedy about a male model played by Ben Stiller who is brainwashed into attempting to assassinate the Prime Minister of Malaysia,[33] had earlier been condemned by the Malaysian Film Censorship Board as "definitely unsuitable", though it did not impose a ban as it expected film distributors to exercise discretion.[34] The BFC stated only that the film had been banned "in view of controversial elements gathered from feedback".[32] The ban was lifted at the beginning of 2006, which enabled the film to be released on DVD.[35]

Article 14(2) also empowers Parliament to impose restrictions on the rights guaranteed by all three limbs of Article 14(1) on the ground of public order. The term public order has been given an expansive interpretation that highlights the importance which the Singapore Government places upon social stability. In Chee Siok Chin, which dealt with the constitutionality of sections 13A and 13B of the Miscellaneous Offences (Public Order and Nuisance) Act[38] the High Court approved the following quotation from V.N. Shukla's Constitution of India (9th ed., 1994):[39]

The expression 'public order' is synonymous with public peace, safety, and tranquility. It signifies absence of disorder involving breaches of local significance in contradistinction to national upheavals such as revolution, civil strife or war, affecting the security of the State. To illustrate, the State may, in the interests of public order, prohibit and punish the causing of loud and raucous noise in streets and public places by means of sound amplifying instruments; regulate the hours and place of public discussions and the use of public streets for the purpose of exercising freedom; provide for expulsion of hecklers from meetings and assemblies; punish utterances tending to incite breach of the peace or riot and use of threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour in any public place or at any public meeting with intent to cause a breach of the peace or whereby breach of the peace is likely to be caused, and all such acts as would endanger public safety.
Such an interpretation is consistent with earlier cases. In Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Public Prosecutor (1994),[40] Chief Justice Yong Pung How considered the term in relation to the right to freedom of religion embodied in Article 15(4) of the Constitution[41] and stated:[42]

I am of the view that religious beliefs ought to have proper protection, but actions undertaken or flowing from such beliefs must conform with the general law relating to public order and social protection. The right of freedom of religion must be reconciled with "the right of the State to employ the sovereign power to ensure peace, security and orderly living without which constitutional guarantee of civil liberty would be a mockery" (Commissioner, HRE v LT Swamiar AIR 1954 SC 282).[43] The sovereignty, integrity and unity of Singapore are undoubtedly the paramount mandate of the Constitution and anything, including religious beliefs and practices, which tend to run counter to these objectives must be restrained.
In Chee Siok Chin it was further clarified that "the legislative power to circumscribe the rights conferred by Art 14 of the Constitution is, inter alia, delineated by what is 'in the interest of public order' and not confined to 'the maintenance of public order'. This is a much wider legislative remit that allows Parliament to take a prophylactic approach in the maintenance of public order. This necessarily will include laws that are not purely designed or crafted for the immediate or direct maintenance of public order ...".[27]

The Government has power to limit the circulation of local and foreign media in Singapore under the Broadcasting Act[44] and the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act ("NPPA").[45] These Acts can be considered as imposing restrictions on free speech based on public order. For instance, the Broadcasting (Class Licence) Notification,[46] made under section 9 of the Broadcasting Act, makes it mandatory for an Internet content provider to register with the Media Development Authority (MDA) if it is, or if the Authority thinks that it is, an individual providing any programme about or a body of persons engaged in the "propagation, promotion or discussion of political or religious issues relating to Singapore, on the World Wide Web through the Internet".[47] The MDA can fine a licensee, or suspend or cancel its licence, if it has breached the terms of its licence, any relevant code of practice issued by the Authority, any provisions of the Broadcasting Act, or any direction issued by the Authority or the Minister for Information, Communications and the Arts.[48] In addition, it is an offence to provide a broadcasting service without a licence,[49] and a convicted person is liable to a fine of up to S$200,000, jail of up to three years, or both. If the offence continues after conviction, a further fine of up to $10,000 per day may be imposed.[50]

The Minister may declare that any foreign broadcasting service which is rebroadcast in Singapore has been "engaging in the domestic politics of Singapore".[51] Rebroadcasting such a "declared foreign broadcasting service" is prohibited without the Minister's approval, which can be refused, revoked without reasons, or granted on conditions, which may include restrictions on the number of people permitted to receive the service and suspensions of the service for certain periods.[52] Failing to comply with the above rules is a crime punishable by a fine of up to $100,000.[53] Similar provisions exist in the NPPA to enable the circulation of foreign newspapers in Singapore to be restricted.[54] In February 1987, the Asian Wall Street Journal was declared to have engaged in domestic politics and its circulation was limited to 400 copies.[55] The newspaper's publisher, Dow Jones Publishing Co. (Asia) Inc., applied unsuccessfully to the High Court for certiorari to quash the Minister's orders. On appeal to the Court of Appeal, Dow Jones argued that the Minister had acted irrationally and misinterpreted scope of his powers under the NPPA by not considering the right to free speech protected by Article 14(1)(a). The Court dismissed the argument on the ground that Dow Jones could not rely on the Article as it only applied to Singapore citizens. Furthermore, even if Dow Jones could raise the constitutionality of the relevant provisions of the NPPA on the basis that Singapore citizens were indirectly affected by it, it was not evident that the right to free speech included the right to receive information. In any case, even if the latter argument was accepted, it might be said that the right of Singapore citizens to receive information by reading the Asian Wall Street Journal had not been impaired since 400 copies of it were still in circulation.[56] The Court interpreted the term domestic politics broadly, holding that in Singapore's context it included:[57]

... the political system of Singapore and the political ideology underpinning it, the public institutions that are a manifestation of the system and the policies of the government of the day that give life to the political system. In other words, the domestic politics of Singapore relate to the multitude of issues concerning how Singapore should be governed in the interest and for the welfare of its people.
In addition to empowering the Minister to limit the circulation of foreign newspapers as described above, the NPPA generally imposes curbs on the foreign ownership of newspaper companies,[58] and requires a permit to be obtained for the publication, sale and distribution of newspapers.[59] In a September 2011 statement, the Ministry of Information, Communications and the Arts justified the NPPA's existence, stating: "The various safeguards provided for in the NPPA help to ensure that the media operating in Singapore play a responsible role and that publishers are accountable for the content they publish. The safeguards also prevent local newspapers from being manipulated by foreign interests which can have a divisive effect on social cohesion. These considerations are still valid today. Journalistic freedom to report responsibly has not been compromised."[60]

The Sedition Act,[61] Public Entertainments and Meetings Act,[36] and Public Order Act 2009[37] are statutes which arguably impose restrictions on the freedom of speech and expression, as well as the freedom of assembly, in the interests of public order. The Sedition Act has been used to restrict the propagation of opinions that have a seditious tendency, which includes a tendency to promote feelings of ill-will and hostility between different races or classes of Singapore's population.[62] In Public Prosecutor v. Koh Song Huat Benjamin (2005),[63] the accused was convicted under the Act for posting invective and pejorative anti-Muslim remarks on a blog and a forum on the Internet; and in Public Prosecutor v. Ong Kian Cheong and another (2009),[64] a married couple were similarly convicted for distributing religious tracts that were considered seditious and objectionable to Muslims. The Public Entertainments and Meetings Act renders it an offence to provide public entertainment and hold meetings without a licence, and its constitutionality has been upheld before the courts in cases concerning political activities organized by opposition parties.[65]

The right to freedom of association guaranteed by Article 14(1)(c) is curtailed on public order grounds by the Societies Act.[66] The Act requires all clubs, companies, partnerships and associations of ten or more persons to be registered with the Registrar of Societies unless they are already lawfully registered under other statutes.[67] The Registrar may refuse to register certain specified societies if satisfied that, among other things, they are likely to be used "for purposes prejudicial to public peace, welfare or good order in Singapore"; it would be contrary to the national interest; or, if the society is a political association, its rules do not require all its members to be Singapore citizens or it is affiliated with some foreign organization that the Registrar considers contrary to the national interest.[68] The list of specified societies includes the following:[69]

Any society that is not registered is deemed to be an unlawful society, and, as regards such a society, being involved in its management, being a member of it, and attending its meetings, are all offences.[70]

The Minister for Home Affairs also has power to order that a registered society be dissolved if it appears to him or her that, among other things, it is being used for unlawful purposes or for purposes "prejudicial to public peace, welfare or good order in Singapore".[71] Once an order has been made, the society becomes an unlawful society.[72] On 14 January 1972, the Singapore Congregation of Jehovah's Witnesses was dissolved,[73] the Minister stating that the existence of the society was prejudicial to public welfare and good order because its members refused to do National Service,[74] which is generally compulsory for male citizens and second-generation permanent residents. An attempt in Chan Hiang Leng Colin[40] to challenge the ban on the grounds of freedom of religion protected by Article 15(1) of the Constitution proved unsuccessful.

Parliament may, under Articles 14(2)(a) and 14(2)(b) of the Constitution, rely on the ground of morality to impose restrictions on two of the constitutional freedoms embodied in Article 14: the right to freedom of speech and expression, and the right to freedom of association.[75]

There are currently no Singaporean cases which have specifically discussed the meaning of morality. However, legislation such as the Films Act,[76] which establishes film censorship and classification regimes; and the Undesirable Publications Act,[77] under which obscene or otherwise objectionable publications may be banned, can be regarded as restrictions on free expression pursuant to this ground. In Rathinam Ramesh v. Public Prosecutor (2010),[78] where the issue was the sentence that should be imposed on a person convicted of distributing uncertified films contrary to the Films Act, the High Court held that "the control of film distribution under the Films Act was for the purpose of maintaining public order and morality"[79] and the accused had not undermined public morality since the films he had been distributing were not obscene.[80]

With regard to the issue of censorship, in 2003 the Censorship Review Committee said that "the responsibility to guide and control will have to be increasingly borne by the individual, the public, particularly parents, and the industry. While the regulator may define and regulate sensitive areas like race and religion, in the areas of morality, the responsibility will have to be devolved to the public and citizen advisory committees."[81] In response, the Ministry of Information, Communication and the Arts (MICA) stated that the Government "must continue to remain mindful of the concerns and values of the majority".[82]

The meaning of morality is therefore dependent on the views of the majority of Singapore citizens, as expressed through public channels and citizen advisory committees. Censorship has therefore been applied to obscene content that "erodes moral values through pornography, deviant sexual practices, sexual violence, child pornography, bestiality, etc."[83] Public morality is not a static idea, but one that evolves with societal norms and values. For example, the MICA has endorsed a "flexible and contextual approach for homosexual content",[84] and has liberalized its censorship of issues such as violence, sexual content and nudity, and coarse language in media.

Unique to Article 14(2)(a) is an addendum stating that the right to freedom of speech and expression may be curtailed by restrictions designed to protect the privileges of Parliament, or to provide against contempt of court, defamation or incitement to any offence. The Constitution does not require Parliament to show that is necessary or expedient to restrict free speech in the interest of these grounds.

Article 63 of the Constitution provides for the Legislature to "determine and regulate the privileges, immunities or powers of Parliament" by law, and it has done so by enacting the Parliament (Privileges, Immunities and Powers) Act.[85]

Under the Act, it is a contempt of Parliament to perform certain acts, for instance, to insult the Speaker or any Member of Parliament (MP) coming to or going from Parliament on account of his or her conduct in Parliament or of anything done or said by him or her in Parliament;[86] or to publish any statement, whether in writing or otherwise, which falsely or scandalously defames, or which reflects on the character of, the Speaker or any MP touching on his or her conduct in Parliament or anything done or said by him or her in Parliament.[87] It is presumably not open to a person charged with one of these offences to argue that it violates the Article 14 right to freedom of speech and expression. However, there is not yet any case law addressing this provision, and thus little guidance as to how the courts are to interpret the restriction.

Article 14(2)(a) of the Constitution provides that Parliament may restrict the right to freedom of speech and expression to provide against contempt of court. One of the more prominent uses of the court's contempt power has been for the Attorney-General to charge persons with the common law offence of scandalizing the court.

The High Court case of Attorney-General v. Wain (1991)[88] established that by enacting section 8(1) of the Supreme Court of Judicature Act (Cap. 322 , 1985 Rev. Ed.) (now section 7(1) of Cap. 322, 2007 Rev. Ed.) ("SCJA"), which states that "[t]he High Court and the Court of Appeal shall have power to punish for contempt of court", Parliament had conferred on these courts the power to act against persons that have scandalized the court. Furthermore, Article 162 could not be relied upon to require that the offence be read down to conform with the right to freedom of speech and expression.[89] Article 162 states:

Subject to this Article, all existing laws shall continue in force on and after the commencement of this Constitution and all laws which have not been brought into force by the date of the commencement of this Constitution may, subject as aforesaid, be brought into force on or after its commencement, but all such laws shall, subject to this Article, be construed as from the commencement of this Constitution with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with this Constitution.
The Court reasoned that Article 162 had no application to the SCJA as the latter was not an existing law at the date of commencement of the Constitution (that is, 9 August 1965),[90] having been enacted in 1969.[89] However, the Court did not consider the effect of Article 4 of the Constitution on the offence. That Article states: "This Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic of Singapore and any law enacted by the Legislature after the commencement of this Constitution which is inconsistent with this Constitution shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void." Subsequently, in Attorney-General v. Chee Soon Juan (2006),[91] the High Court held that the offence of scandalizing the court could not be regarded as unconstitutional since Article 14(2)(a) clearly empowered Parliament to restrict free speech in order to punish acts amounting to contempt of court. Parliament had done so by enacting section 7(1) of the SCJA.[92]

The classic definition of a contempt by scandalizing the court was enunciated in R. v. Gray (1900)[93] by the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales, Lord Russell of Killowen, who said: "Any act done or writing published calculated to bring a Court or a judge of the Court into contempt, or to lower his authority, is a contempt of Court."[94]

Up until Attorney-General v. Shadrake (2010),[95] the High Court had adopted an "inherent tendency" test to determine liability for the offence.[96] This was in contrast to the "real risk" test adopted by many other common law countries.[97] The inherent tendency test was characterized by the act or words complained of possessing an inherent tendency to interfere with the administration of justice.[98] Moreover, an act or statement would have such an inherent tendency if it conveyed to an average reasonable reader or viewer allegations of bias, lack of impartiality, impropriety or any wrongdoing concerning a judge (and a fortiori, a court) in the exercise of his judicial function.[99]

In Shadrake, Justice Quentin Loh suggested that the distinction between the tests was in truth illusory. He expressed the view that if it was purely a question of semantics, it would be preferable for the court to adopt the real risk test as it precisely conveys to laymen and lawyers what the law is concerned with. He stated:[100]

The [inherent tendency] formula has shown itself to be susceptible to controversy and misunderstanding, not least because the literal meaning of inherent tendency tends to obscure the fact that a contextual analysis is actually required. Indeed, given how the word 'inherent' is commonly understood to indicate something intrinsic, an inherent tendency test would therefore appear to preclude any consideration of extrinsic factors.
Holding that "a publication must post a real risk of undermining public confidence in the administration of justice before it is held to be contemptuous",[100] Loh J. elucidated the elements of the real risk test as follows:[101]

Counsel for the respondent had argued that the right to free speech compelled the adoption of the real risk test. However, the Court declined to consider the matter as it had already decided to adopt the test, and since full arguments had not been made on the point.[103] Nonetheless, Loh J. said that the courts had to define the offence "consistently with the words, structure and spirit of Art 14, which clearly demand some kind of balance to be struck between the freedom of speech, which is the rule, and the offence of contempt, an exception to the rule. At the very minimum, neither can be defined in such a way that renders the other otiose."[104] He noted that the respondent's counsel had not argued that the offence is inherently unconstitutional, and that a majority of cases had concluded that the real risk test, coupled with a right of fair criticism, is a reasonable limitation on free speech.[105]

On appeal, the Court of Appeal in Shadrake v. Attorney-General (2011)[106] held that the apparent difference between the inherent tendency test and the real risk test was a "legal red herring".[107] However, since the inherent tendency test had caused confusion, it affirmed the High Court's ruling that the real risk test was the applicable test for scandalizing the court.[108] It felt that trying to elaborate on the meaning of a "real risk" was not helpful,[109] and that the court should simply ask itself whether, "having regard to the facts as well as surrounding context, a 'real risk' that public confidence in the administration of justice is – or would be – undermined as a result of the impugned statement?"[110]

Although fair criticism has been treated as a defence to scandalizing the court in some cases, the Court of Appeal preferred to view it as an element of liability, though it cautioned that "the precise characterisation of the concept of fair criticism was not fully canvassed before us ... . Accordingly, our views on this point must necessarily be taken, to that extent, to be provisional in nature."[111] The Court said that adopting this approach ensures that an alleged contemnor is not disadvantaged with regard to the burden of proof: "If the concept of fair criticism relates to liability, then the evidential burden would be on the party relying on it. The legal burden, on the other hand, would be on the Respondent to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the impugned statement does not constitute fair criticism, and that it presents a real risk of undermining public confidence in the administration of justice. If, however, the concept of fair criticism constitutes a defence, then the legal burden would shift to the alleged contemnor to show on the balance of probabilities that the impugned statement amounts to fair criticism."[112]

The Court approved the factors set out by the High Court in Attorney-General v. Tan Liang Joo John (2009)[113] that are relevant in establishing that criticism of the courts is fair:[114]

In Tan Liang Joo John, Justice Judith Prakash stated that this was not a closed list, and that the court is entitled to take into account all the circumstances of the case which in its view go towards showing bad faith. She also noted that English authorities impose another limit on the content of criticism – that the acts or words in question must neither impute improper motives to nor impugn the integrity, propriety and impartiality of judges or the courts. However, she declined to follow these authorities and averred that to impose such a limit would be unnecessary and potentially over-restrictive of legitimate criticism.[115]

As regards the relationship between the offence of scandalizing the court and the right to free speech, the Court of Appeal commented that:[116]

... the law relating to contempt of court operates against the broader legal canvass [sic: canvas] of the right to freedom of speech that is embodied both within Art 14 of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ... as well as the common law. The issue, in the final analysis, is one of balance: just as the law relating to contempt of court ought not to
unduly infringe the right to freedom of speech, by the same token, that right is not an absolute one, for its untrammelled abuse would be a negation of the right itself.
The Court pointed out that the last mentioned point was embodied in Article 14(2) and noted that Parliament had provided the courts with jurisdiction to punish for contempt by enacting section 7(1) of the SCJA.[116] It held that the real risk test strikes an appropriate balance between free speech and its abuse, and declined to apply the "clear and present danger" test applicable to the First Amendment to the US Constitution as free speech had gained a paramount status in the US quite different from Commonwealth jurisdictions due to the nation's unique cultural and constitutional heritage.[117]

Article 14(2)(a) of the Constitution also provides Parliament with the power to impose restrictions designed to provide against defamation. The law of defamation thus functions as a restriction on a person's right to freedom of speech. The law of defamation has its roots in the common law which existed before the enactment of the Constitution in 1965. As such, the courts must take Article 162 of the Constitution into consideration when deciding whether the common law tort of defamation offends the fundamental liberty of freedom of speech and expression. The Article provides that all existing laws shall continue in force after the commencement of the Constitution subject to "modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity" with the Constitution of Singapore.

However, in Review Publishing, the Court of Appeal held that the common law of defamation, as modified by the Defamation Act,[118] restricts the right to free speech. The appellants in that case pointed out that the Defamation Ordinance 1960,[119] which presupposed the existence of the common law of defamation, had been enacted before the 1963 Constitution of the State of Singapore.[120] Thus, it could not have been a law enacted to derogate from the right to free speech guaranteed by Article 10(1)(a) of the Federal Constitution of Malaysia, which became applicable to Singapore when it became a state of the Federation of Malaysia on 16 September 1963.[121] The Court disagreed, holding that Article 105(1) of the 1963 State Constitution, which was the predecessor of Article 162, had the effect of re-enacting all laws existing as at 16 September 1963, including the Defamation Ordinance. Thus Article 105(1) itself was an express restriction on the right to free speech.[122] If this was not the case, then when the 1963 State Constitution came into force all laws which restricted Article 10(1) of the Federal Constitution would have become unconstitutional, a result which the Court regarded as an "astonishing conclusion".[123]

Article 14 of the Constitution has been raised as a point of contention in relation to the defence of qualified privilege. The Court of Appeal has discussed the applicability of Article 14 in two cases concerning prominent government figures.

In Jeyaratnam Joshua Benjamin v. Lee Kuan Yew (1992),[124] Justice L.P. Thean, when delivering the judgment of the court, held that "[p]ersons holding public office or politicians ... are equally entitled to have their reputations protected as those of any other persons".[125] In this case, counsel for the appellant argued that "qualified privilege attaches to defamatory publications concerning public officials (or candidates for a public office) relating to their official conduct or the performance of their public duties by those who have an honest and legitimate interest in the matter to those who have a corresponding and legitimate interest (whether as electors or as citizens potentially affected by the conduct of public officials)".[126] The fact that the statements were made in a political rally during the run-up to elections meant that the requirement of a legitimate interest was met. Lingens v. Austria (1986)[127] was relied upon in support of the premise that "the limits of acceptable criticism are accordingly wider as regards a politician as such than as regards a private individual".[128] In Lingens, the European Court of Human Rights was of the opinion that a politician "inevitably and knowingly lays himself open to close scrutiny of his every word and deed by both journalists and the public at large, and he must consequently display a greater degree of tolerance".[128] The reasoning of the European Court was in line with the public figure doctrine enunciated in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964),[129] where the United States Supreme Court decided in favour of the defendant newspaper, making it one of the key decisions supporting the freedom of the press.

However, the Singapore Court of Appeal dismissed the applicability of both cases on the ground that the terms of Article 14 of the Constitution differ materially from Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which was relied upon by the court in Lingens; as well as the First Amendment and the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which were relied upon by the court in New York Times. The public figure doctrine was thus expressly rejected by the Court. Thean J. said: "Such criticisms or attacks must, in our opinion, respect the bounds set by the law of defamation, and we do not accept that the publication of false and defamatory allegations, even in the absence of actual malice on the part of the publisher, should be allowed to pass with impunity."[125]

To further rebut the presumption that the circumstances of a general election are sufficient to give rise to an occasion of privilege, the Court also relied on section 14 of the Defamation Act which, at the time, provided thus:

A defamatory statement published by or on behalf of a candidate in any election to Parliament or other elected or partially elected body shall not be deemed to be published on a privileged occasion on the ground that it is material to a question in issue in the election, whether or not the person by whom it is published is qualified to vote at the election.[130]
The court was unwilling to extend the traditional defence of qualified privilege as it was of the opinion that Parliament's intention in enacting section 14 was clear: it is wholly untenable that the speech made at an election rally is privileged when the same speech published by or on behalf of a candidate for the election is not.[131]

The Court of Appeal's reasoning in Jeyaretnam has been the subject of academic criticism. Michael Hor has criticized the distinction drawn by the Court between Article 14 of the Constitution and its American and European counterparts as overly literal.[132] The current interpretation of the law gives the legislature an unfettered discretion in limiting freedom of speech in Singapore through the enactment and amendment of relevant legislation. Hor opines that:[133]

What is instructive and applicable in Singapore is the realisation that it is the constitutional responsibility of the judiciary to ensure that the basic commitment to the freedom of speech is not undermined by giving the Legislature carte blanche to derogate therefrom in either some or all of the specified exceptions. Our courts must assume the task of scrutinising the prevailing rules of defamation to ensure that they strike a justifiable balance between the freedom of speech and the need to protect individual reputation.
Hor has also said that the Court's approach in Jeyaretnam fails to provide adequate safeguards to account for future politicians and holders of public office who may be less than honourable.[134] Moreover, Singapore courts should not start with the assumption that the common law is necessarily constitutional, as this would be tantamount to "putting the cart before the horse". Rather, the Constitution ought to be interpreted consistently with the common law.[135]

In Review Publishing,[8] Chief Justice Chan Sek Keong, delivering judgment on behalf of the Court of Appeal, declined to infer into the common law of Singapore the defence of responsible journalism, or "Reynolds privilege", developed by the House of Lords in Reynolds v. Times Newspapers Ltd. (1999),[136] at least where non-Singapore citizens who have been sued for defamation are seeking to rely on it. This was because the defence was not a natural development of common law principles but had been impelled by the right to freedom of expression protected by Article 10 of the European Convention. The Reynolds privilege could only be adopted in Singapore on the basis of the right to free speech guaranteed by Article 14(1)(a) of the Constitution. However, as the appellants were not Singapore citizens, they could not rely on this provision.[137]

The Court then discussed, on an obiter basis, the applicability of the Reynolds privilege to Singapore citizens. It held that the key question is whether or not, in the context of publication of matters of public interest, the rationale behind the Reynolds privilege ought to apply such that constitutional free speech is the rule and restrictions on this right are the exception. In considering the factors relevant to the key question, Chan C.J. stated that whilst the court has the power to dictate the direction of the common law of defamation as adopted upon the enactment of the Constitution, Parliament still has overriding powers to limit the freedom of speech and expression where defamatory publications and statements are made:[138]

First, our courts must be mindful of the extent to which they can decide whether constitutional free speech should prevail over protection of reputation. Although there is nothing in Art 14(2)(a) of the Singapore Constitution and the Defamation Act which precludes our courts from developing the common law of defamation for the common convenience and welfare of society in keeping with Singapore's prevailing political, social and cultural values (save for those provisions in these two statutes which impose such a restriction), Art 14(2)(a) also expressly provides that it is Parliament which has the final say on how the balance between constitutional free speech and protection of reputation should be struck.
Secondly, when striking a balance between freedom of expression and the protection of reputation, the court will need to make a value judgment that is dependent on local political and social conditions. The Court said that the following factors were relevant to the making of this value judgment:[139]

Finally, the Court expressed the view that if free speech is to be favoured over the protection of reputation in applying a Reynolds-type defence, another issue that will have to be considered is what balance should be struck between the two competing interests. In this connection, Chan C.J. said that the court would have to decide whether freedom of expression is to be given preference over the protection of reputation, whether it is a fundamental right that trumps the protection of reputation unless it is shown that the defamatory statement was made maliciously, or whether it is co-equal with the protection of reputation.[141]

The Chief Justice also suggested that the rationale in the Reynolds case might be given effect by continuing to find the defendant liable for defamation but reducing the amount of damages payable depending on how much care he or she took to ensure the accuracy of the information published. He noted: "There is no reason why a defendant who has published a defamatory statement should be allowed to get off scot-free for injuring the plaintiff's reputation simply because he has satisfied the 'responsible journalism' test."[142]

Article 14(2)(a) of the Constitution provides that the right to freedom of speech and expression may be restricted to provide against incitement to any offence. This ground has not yet been considered in a Singapore case.

A number of statutory provisions prohibit incitement. Under section 107(a) of the Penal Code,[143] a person is said to abet the doing of a thing if he or she instigates someone to do that thing. If a person abets an offence, and as a result the act abetted is committed, the person is to be punished with the punishment provided for the offence.[144] If the offence is not committed due to the abetment, and it is punishable by imprisonment, the abettor is to be imprisoned for up to a quarter of the maximum jail term of the offence, or may receive a fine, or both. If either the abettor or the person abetted is a public servant whose duty it was to prevent the offence from happening, the abettor may be imprisoned for up to half of the maximum jail term of the offence, or may be fined, or receive both penalties.[145] However, if the offence abetted but not committed is punishable with death or life imprisonment, the abettor is liable to a penalty of up to seven years' imprisonment, a fine, or both. If any hurt is caused as a result of the abetment, the abettor may be jailed up to 14 years and must also be fined.[146]

Under section 505(c) of the Penal Code, it is an offence to make, publish or circulate any statement, rumour or report in written, electronic or other media with an intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any class or community of persons to commit any offence against any other class or community of persons. The penalty is imprisonment for up to three years, a fine, or both. No offence is committed if the person who made, published or circulated the statement had reasonable grounds for believing it was true, and did not intend to incite one community against another.

Article 14(3) provides that the right to form associations may also be restricted by any law relating to labour or education. The Trade Unions Act[147] regulates labour organizations, while schools are generally required to be registered under either the Education Act[148] or the Private Education Act.[149] Under the Education Act, it is an offence for pupils or other persons to assemble on the premises of a school the registration of which has been cancelled.[150] Statutes governing universities provide that student bodies created pursuant to a university's constituent documents must be registered under the Societies Act[66][151] unless the Minister for Home Affairs has exempted such bodies.[152]

Under Article 149(1) of the Constitution, if an Act recites that action has been taken or threatened by any substantial body of persons inside or outside Singapore:

any provision of that law designed to stop or prevent that action or any amendment to that law is valid even if it is inconsistent with specified fundamental liberties, including the rights to freedom of speech, assembly and association guaranteed by Article 14. Article 149 thus shields the Internal Security Act[153] from unconstitutionality. Among other things, the Act authorizes detention without trial to prevent persons from acting in a manner prejudicial to Singapore's security or the maintenance of public order or essential services.

Section 5 of the Parliament (Privileges, Immunities and Powers) Act,[85] enacted pursuant to Article 63 of the Constitution, specifically provides for freedom of expression in Parliament in the following terms:

There shall be freedom of speech and debate and proceedings in Parliament, and such freedom of speech and debate and proceedings shall not be liable to be impeached or questioned in any court, commission of inquiry, committee of inquiry, tribunal or any other place whatsoever out of Parliament.
This provision is based on one of the rights stated in the English Bill of Rights 1689[7] which reads: "[T]he Freedome of Speech and Debates or Proceedings in Parlyament ought not to be impeached or questioned in any Court or Place out of Parlyament."Barbara Joan Gordon is a superheroine appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics, commonly in association with the superhero Batman. The character was created by television producer William Dozier, editor Julius Schwartz, writer Gardner Fox, and artist Carmine Infantino. Dozier, the producer of the 1960s Batman television series, requested Schwartz to call for a new female counterpart to the superhero Batman that could be introduced into publication and the third season of the show simultaneously. The character subsequently made her first comic-book appearance as Batgirl in Detective Comics #359, titled "The Million Dollar Debut of Batgirl!" in January 1967, by Fox and Infantino,[1] allowing her to be introduced into the television series, portrayed by actress Yvonne Craig, in the season 3 premiere "Enter Batgirl, Exit Penguin", in September that same year.

Barbara Gordon is the daughter of Gotham City police commissioner James Gordon, the sister of serial killer James Gordon Jr. and is initially employed as head of the Gotham City Public Library. Although the character appeared in various DC Comics publications, she was prominently featured in Batman Family which debuted in 1975, partnered with the original Robin, Dick Grayson, whom she has a history of working closely and being romantically involved with. In 1988, following the editorial retirement of the character's Batgirl persona in Batgirl Special #1, the graphic novel Batman: The Killing Joke depicts the Joker shooting her through the spinal cord in her civilian identity, resulting in paraplegia. In subsequent stories, the character was reestablished as a technical advisor, computer expert and information broker known as Oracle. Becoming a valuable asset providing intelligence and computer hacking services to assist other superheroes, she makes her first appearance as Oracle in Suicide Squad #23 (1989) and later became a featured lead of the Birds of Prey series. In 2011, as part of DC Comics The New 52 relaunch, Barbara recovered from her paralysis following a surgical procedure and returned as Batgirl. Barbara has since featured in the eponymous Batgirl monthly title as well as Birds of Prey and other Batman books. Following the events of Joker War, Barbara returned to her Oracle role while recovering from an injury, and continues to operate as both Batgirl and Oracle after the 2021 Infinite Frontier event.

The character was a popular comic book figure during the Silver Age of Comic Books, due to her appearances in the Batman television series and continued media exposure. She has achieved similar popularity in the Modern Age of Comic Books under the Birds of Prey publication and as a disabled icon. The character has been the subject of academic analysis concerning the roles of women, librarians, and disabled people in mainstream media. The events of The Killing Joke, which led to the character's paralysis, as well as the restoration of her mobility, have also been a subject of debate among comic book writers, artists, editors, and readership. Viewpoints range from sexism in comic books, to the limited visibility of disabled characters and the practicality of disabilities existing in a fictional universe where magic, technology, and medical science exceed the limitations of the real world.

As both Batgirl and Oracle, Barbara Gordon has been featured in various adaptations related to the Batman franchise, including television, film, animation, video games, and other merchandise. Aside from Craig, the character has been portrayed by Dina Meyer, Alicia Silverstone (as Barbara Wilson), and Jeté Laurence, and has been voiced by Melissa Gilbert, Tara Strong, Danielle Judovits, Alyson Stoner, Mae Whitman, Kimberly Brooks and Briana Cuoco among others. Barbara Gordon appeared in the third season of the HBO Max series Titans as the new commissioner of Gotham City portrayed by Savannah Welch.[2] The character was slated for a solo film set in the DCEU, starring Leslie Grace in the title role and intended to be released on HBO Max. The film was canceled in August 2022. In 2011, Barbara Gordon ranked 17th in IGN's "Top 100 Comic Book Heroes".[3]

Before the introduction of Barbara Gordon, the Batwoman character and her sidekick Bat-Girl appeared in Batman-related publications but were eventually removed at the direction of editor Julius Schwartz for being outdated and unrealistic. Schwartz stated that he had been asked to develop a new female character to attract a female viewership to the Batman television series of the 1960s.[4] Executive producer William Dozier suggested that the new character would be the daughter of Gotham City's Police Commissioner James Gordon, and that she would adopt the identity of Batgirl.[5] When Dozier and producer Howie Horowitz saw rough concept artwork of the new Batgirl by artist Carmine Infantino during a visit to DC offices, they optioned the character in a bid to help sell a third season to the ABC television network. Infantino reflected on the creation of Batgirl, stating "Bob Kane had had a Bat-Girl for about three stories in the '50s but she had nothing to do with a bat. She was like a pesky girl version of Robin. I knew we could do a lot better, so Julie and I came up with the real Batgirl, who was so popular she almost got her TV show."[6] Yvonne Craig portrayed the character in the show's third season.[7]

Barbara Gordon and her alter ego Batgirl debuted in Detective Comics #359 (Jan. 1967), "The Million Dollar Debut of Batgirl", as the daughter of Gotham City's Police Commissioner James Gordon. In the debut story, while driving to a costume ball dressed as a female version of Batman, sporting a black bodysuit with yellow gloves, boots, utility belt, and a bat symbol along with a blue cape and cowl (similar to Batman's), Barbara Gordon intervenes in a kidnapping attempt on Bruce Wayne by the supervillain Killer Moth, attracting Batman's attention and leading to a crime-fighting career. Although Batman insists she give up crime-fighting because of her gender, Batgirl disregards his objections.[8]

In her civilian identity, Barbara Gordon, Ph.D., is depicted as a career woman with a doctorate in library science, as well as being head of the Gotham City Public Library, "presumably one of the largest public libraries in the DC Comics version of reality."[9] She was given a regular backup slot in Detective Comics starting with issue #384 (February 1969), alternating issues with Robin until issue #404, after which she had the backup slot to herself. Frank Robbins wrote nearly all of these backups, which were penciled first by Gil Kane and later by Don Heck.[5] Barbara Gordon's Batgirl exceeded the earlier Bat-Girl and Batwoman characters in popularity, and readers requested for her to appear in other titles. Although some readers requested that Batwoman also continue to appear in the publication, DC responded to the fan-based acclaim and criticism of the new character in an open letter in Detective Comics #417 (1971),[10] stating: "I'd like to say a few words about the reaction some readers have to Batgirl. These are readers who remember Batwoman and the other Bat-girls from years back ...They were there because romance seemed to be needed in Batman's life. But thanks to the big change and a foresighted editor, these hapless females are gone for good. In their place stands a girl who is a capable crime-fighter, a far cry from Batwoman who constantly had to be rescued [by] Batman."[11]

Batgirl continues to appear in DC Comics publications throughout the late 1960s and 1970s, as a supporting character in Detective Comics, in addition to guest appearances in various titles such as Justice League of America,[12] World's Finest Comics,[13] The Brave and the Bold,[14] Action Comics,[15] and Superman.[16] In the mid-1970s, Batgirl reveals her secret identity to her father (who had already discovered it on his own) and serves as a member of the United States House of Representatives. She moves to Washington, D.C., intending to give up her career as Batgirl and in June 1972, appeared in a story entitled "Batgirl's Last Case."[17] Julius Schwartz brought her back a year later in Superman #268 (1973),[18] in which she has a blind date with Clark Kent, establishing their friendship, and fights alongside Superman. Batgirl and Superman later team up twice more in Superman #279 and DC Comics Presents #19.

Batgirl also guest-starred in other Superman-related titles such as Adventure Comics, and in Superman Family #171, where she teams up with Supergirl. The character is given a starring role in DC's Batman Family comic book which debuted in 1975.[19] The original Robin Dick Grayson became her partner in the series and the two were frequently referred to as the "Dynamite Duo: Batgirl & Robin." Batgirl meets Batwoman in Batman Family #10, when the retired superhero briefly returns to crime-fighting (before Kane is murdered by the Bronze Tiger). The two fight Killer Moth and the Cavalier, and learn each other's secret identities. Batwoman retires once again at the conclusion of the story, leaving Batgirl to continue crime-fighting.[20] Although this series ended after three years of publication,[21] Batgirl continued to appear in back-up stories published in Detective Comics through issue #519 (October 1982).

Crisis on Infinite Earths, a limited miniseries published in 1985, was written to reduce the complex history of DC Comics to a single continuity. Although Batgirl is a featured character, her role is relatively small—she delivers Supergirl's eulogy in issue #7 of the 12-part series.[22] The conclusion of Crisis on Infinite Earths changed DC Universe continuity in many ways. Following the reboot, Barbara Gordon is born to Roger and Thelma Gordon, and she is Jim Gordon's niece/adopted daughter in post-crisis continuity. Post-Crisis, Supergirl does not arrive on Earth until after Gordon has established herself as Oracle; many adventures she shared with Batgirl are retroactively described as having been experienced by Power Girl. In Secret Origins #20 featuring Batgirl and the Golden Age Dr. Mid-Nite (1987), Barbara Gordon's origin is rebooted by author Barbara Randall. Within the storyline, Gordon recounts the series of events that led to her career as Batgirl, including her first encounter with Batman as a child, studying martial arts under the tutelage of a sensei, memorizing maps and blueprints of the city, excelling in academics to skip grades, and pushing herself to become a star athlete.[23]

DC officially retired the hero in the one-shot comic Batgirl Special #1 (July 1988), written by Barbara Kesel.[24]

Later that year, Barbara Gordon appeared in Alan Moore's Batman: The Killing Joke. In this graphic novel, the Joker shoots and paralyzes Barbara in an attempt to drive her father insane, thereby proving to Batman that anyone can be morally compromised. Although events in The Killing Joke exert a great impact on the character, the story has little to do with her.[25] In 2006, during an interview with Wizard, Moore expressed regret over his treatment of the character calling it "shallow and ill-conceived."[26] He stated before writing the graphic novel, "I asked DC if they had any problem with me crippling Barbara Gordon—who was Batgirl at the time—and if I remember, I spoke to Len Wein, who was our editor on the project", and following a discussion with then-Executive Editorial Director Dick Giordano, "Len got back onto the phone and said, 'Yeah, okay, cripple the bitch.'"[26] Although there has been speculation as to whether or not editors at DC specifically intended to have the character's paralysis become permanent, Brian Cronin, author of Was Superman A Spy?: And Other Comic Book Legends Revealed (2009) noted that DC had hired Barbara Kesel to write the Batgirl Special specifically to retire the character and set her in place for The Killing Joke.[27]

Following the release of the graphic novel, comic book editor and writer Kim Yale discussed how distasteful she found the treatment of Barbara Gordon with her husband, fellow comic writer John Ostrander. Rather than allow the character to fall into obscurity, the two decided to revive her as a character living with a disability.[28]

Gail Simone would include the character's paralysis in a list of "major female characters that had been killed, mutilated, and depowered", dubbing the phenomenon "Women in Refrigerators" in reference to a 1994 Green Lantern story where the title character discovers his girlfriend's mutilated body in his refrigerator.[29]

Yale and Ostrander oversaw the development of Barbara Gordon's new persona as Oracle for the next several years.[28] The character made her first comic book appearance as Oracle in Suicide Squad #23, anonymously offering her services to the government's Task Force X.[30][31] In the following two years, Oracle, under the pen of Ostrander and Yale, made guest appearances in various DC titles until her identity was revealed to be Barbara Gordon in Suicide Squad #38 (1990) and she officially becomes a member of the Squad in issue #48 following an invitation from Amanda Waller. In 1992, Dennis O'Neil wrote Oracle as Batman's sole source of information in Batman: Sword of Azrael #1. This newly forged partnership established Oracle's status as Batman's intellectual equal.[32] She is subsequently featured in the 12-issue miniseries The Hacker Files (1993).[33] In "Oracle: Year One"—a story arc contained in The Batman Chronicles #5 (1996)—Yale and Ostrander tell the origin of Barbara Gordon's new persona as Oracle. Initially, Gordon's paralysis plunges her into a state of reactive depression. However, she soon realizes that her aptitude for and training in information sciences have provided her with tremendous skills that could be deployed to fight crime.[34]

In a world increasingly centered on technology and information, she possesses a genius-level intellect; photographic memory; deep knowledge of computers and electronics; expert skills as a hacker; and graduate training in library sciences. One night, she has a dream in which an all-knowing woman (similar to the Oracle at Delphi of Greek mythology) has her face; it is then that she adopts "Oracle" as her codename. She serves as an information broker, gathering and disseminating intelligence to law enforcement organizations and members of the superhero community. She trains under the tutelage of Richard Dragon, one of DC's premiere martial artists, to engage in combat (using eskrima) from her wheelchair. She develops her upper-body strength and targeting skills with both firearms and batarangs.[34]

The success of Chuck Dixon's Black Canary/Oracle: Birds of Prey (1996) led to the comic series Birds of Prey starring the two title characters.[35] During Chuck Dixon's crossover series Nightwing: Hunt for Oracle,[36] Barbara Gordon and Dinah Lance meet in person and establish a long-term friendship. They form the nucleus of the Birds of Prey organization. While Oracle serves as the basic head of operations, Black Canary becomes her full-time employee and field agent. In 2000, the first Batgirl monthly comic was launched with Cassandra Cain as the title character. Oracle appears as a supporting character throughout the series, acting as a mentor to the new Batgirl, alongside Batman. Gail Simone took over as writer of Birds of Prey with issue #56.[37] Simone integrates the Huntress into the comic, making her a central character in the series as Oracle's secondary field agent. In 2003, comic book authors Scott Beatty and Chuck Dixon revised Barbara Gordon's origin with the miniseries Batgirl: Year One.[38] Gordon is a highly gifted child having graduated from high school early, but initially desires to join law enforcement as opposed to vigilantism in the previous origin myths.

During the 2004 crossover event Batman: War Games,[39] Black Mask commandeers Oracle's computers and satellites and engages in a fight to the death with Batman. To prevent Batman from killing his adversary, Oracle initiates the Clock Tower's self-destruct sequence, provoking Batman to rescue her rather than continue the battle. This destroys Gordon's home and headquarters in the clock tower. Subsequently, Oracle decides to move on and leaves Gotham City altogether. She cuts her ties with Batman, and after a temporary world trip with her team, relocates to Metropolis. In the events comprising Gail Simone's Birds of Prey: Between Dark and Dawn (2005),[40] and Birds of Prey: The Battle Within (2005),[41] Oracle is possessed by arch-villain Brainiac, an artificial intelligence entity, in order to become a biological being. Although Oracle overpowers Brainiac and expels him from her body, the advanced virus delivered by him remains despite his absence. The virus steadily causes cybernetic attachments to sprout all over her body. Oracle develops supernatural abilities that allow her to psychically interact with computer information systems. Although she loses these abilities after the virus is rendered dormant following an operation by Doctor Mid-Nite, she discovers she can move her toes. However, this proves to be short-lived; Gordon remains paralyzed.

During the company-wide crossover Infinite Crisis (2005),[42] Oracle teams with the Martian Manhunter in Metropolis to coordinate a counterstrike against the Secret Society's global jailbreak. The renewed romance between Barbara Gordon and Dick Grayson is also cut short by the Infinite Crisis storyline.[43]

When DC continuity jumps forward one year after the events of Infinite Crisis, Oracle and her team continue to work in Metropolis. Oracle works with Batman, although not regularly as before. Oracle continues to lead the Birds of Prey and expands the ranks of the operation. In Birds of Prey #99, Black Canary leaves the team and the Huntress becomes the team's de facto field leader, while Big Barda is brought in as the group's heavy-hitter alongside a larger, rotating roster. Oracle also attempts to reforge her alliance with Power Girl. However, when Oracle invites her to rejoin the team, she replies that she will do so "when Hell freezes over."[44]

In the crossover event Countdown to Final Crisis (2007),[45] Oracle dispatches the Question and Batwoman to capture Trickster and Piper following their role in the murder of Bart Allen. She struggles to keep the identities of the world's heroes from being stolen and coordinates the response to a global crisis engineered by the Calculator, a villainous hacker and information broker. In The All-New Booster Gold #5 (2007),[46] the title hero is given the mission of traveling back in time in order to prevent "a tragedy that he discovers never should've happened—the Joker shooting and paralyzing Barbara Gordon, Batgirl."[46] Although Booster Gold makes several attempts to prevent the events which took place in Batman: The Killing Joke, he ultimately fails and Barbara Gordon's chronological history remains unchanged. Rip Hunter convinces him that Barbara's destiny is to become Oracle.[47] Later, Batman reveals that he kept Joker's photos of Barbara and Booster Gold for years and waited until Booster Gold's correct age before confronting him. Batman then thanks Booster Gold for trying to stop the Joker and offers him his friendship.[48]

In "Whitewater", Gail Simone's final story arc on Birds of Prey (2007),[49] Oracle and her team struggle for power with Spy Smasher, a government agent who has taken over the Birds of Prey organization. Eventually, Spy Smasher is forced to admit her defeat and returns control of the Birds of Prey organization to Oracle. After the arc, Oracle also adopts Misfit into the Birds of Prey. Sean McKeever temporarily took over as author of Birds of Prey, writing issues #113–117, Birds of Prey: Metropolis or Dust (2008). The following arc of the series Birds of Prey: Platinum Flats (2008) is written by Tony Bedard. In the company-wide 2008 Final Crisis storyline, Darkseid—who has finally gained control of the Anti-Life Equation—attempts to put the mind-control equation on the internet. Both Oracle and Mister Terrific make desperate attempts to stop Darkseid, even attempting to shut down the entire Internet. Unfortunately, they both fail and those affected ended up mindless slaves of Darkseid. Freed from Darkseid's control after the restoration of the Multiverse, she attempts to shut down the criminal Unternet set up by her opposite number, the Calculator, as a Darkseid-free replacement for the regular Internet and still used by tech-savvy criminals. However, the Calculator, preventing her moves, takes control of the Kilg%re, gaining the ability to thrive in cyberspace by controlling digital and cybernetic avatars, and tracks Oracle down with his newfound powers. Even though Oracle foils him, she starts doubting her abilities and fears she's losing her edge and brilliance, which results in her disbanding the Birds of Prey team to do some soul-searching.[50] Birds of Prey received cancellation in early 2009, with the final issue being #127.

Oracle is subsequently featured in Oracle: The Cure, a limited series written by Kevin VanHook and a crossover arc with Batman: Battle for the Cowl (2009). The story chronologically follows the events of the Final Crisis and Batman R.I.P. (2008). Oracle has returned to Gotham, and although the Birds of Prey are disbanded, she continues to summon them to help Nightwing and Robin deal with the growing crime in Gotham. The Calculator's plans finally come to their fruition, and Kuttler, hoping to save his dying daughter Wendy takes on the "Babbage" alias and begins prowling the digital world of Alta Viva, a virtual world game, for fragments of the Anti-Life Equation unleashed by Darkseid. Oracle, now living in a dilapidated rented apartment in Gotham, becomes aware of Kuttler's activities after "Cheesefiend", one of her informants, is brutally killed, with the Anti-Life Equation itself, after coming in contact with Babbage.[51] Hoping to stop the Calculator and prevent him from piecing together the fragments of the Anti-Life Equation in his possession, Oracle travels to Hong Kong, hoping to steal them back by the means of an advanced supercomputer programmed to track the chunk of data left behind by Babbage. However, the Calculator discovers her attempts, swearing vengeance upon her.[52] She manages to defeat Calculator, rendering the Anti-Life Equation's fragments useless.[53]

In 2009, the Batgirl comic book was relaunched with Stephanie Brown starring as the title character. Although Oracle initially tries to discourage Brown from crime-fighting, she eventually comes to accept her as Batgirl. She also mentors the Calculator's daughter, Wendy Harris, who was disabled following an attack at Titans Tower.[54] Oracle later takes a job as an assistant professor at Gotham University.[54] During the Green Lantern limited series Blackest Night, Hal Jordan crashes into the Bat-Signal after a fight with the Black Lantern Martian Manhunter. Oracle and Commissioner Gordon are both present.[55] Origins & Omens hints towards an involvement in the storyline. After sending Green Lantern's intel to every superhero community across the planet of the Black Lanterns, the Gordons find themselves being attacked by the original Dark Knight's deceased rogue gallery members, who are all reanimated by the Black Lantern Corps. Oracle and her father are forced to fight for their lives as they witness the Black Lanterns massacring everyone on sight at Gotham Central. During the crisis, Oracle is rendered unconscious by an explosion and is possessed by Deadman, who uses Oracle's body to save Commissioner Gordon from the reanimated King Snake and the Trigger Twins. After being rescued by Batman, Robin, and Red Robin, the Gordons were attacked by Batman and Red Robin's parents with their saviors, the reanimated Graysons and the Drakes. While Grayson and Drake battle the Black Lanterns, Robin takes the Gordons to their underground base where Alfred tends her and her father's wounds.[56]

In Greg Rucka's Detective Comics #862, Barbara Gordon is approached by Huntress and Renee Montoya (the new Question) for help in tracking down a mysterious criminal who ordered a hit on them. Montoya is flabbergasted upon discovering that "Commissioner Gordon's daughter" is a superhero.[57] In 2010, Birds of Prey was relaunched with Gail Simone returning to write the comic. The first arc is a tie-in with the Green Lantern Brightest Day limited series. Oracle reforms the Birds of Prey, this time with Dove and the recently resurrected Hawk as members.[58] A new villainess calling herself the White Canary begins menacing the Birds, and publicly reveals Black Canary's civilian identity and frames her for a murder. While the team contends with White Canary in the streets of Gotham, Oracle is kidnapped by her former associates, Savant and Creote.[59][60] This is eventually revealed to be a ruse in order to trick White Canary. Following the team's victory against White Canary, Oracle fakes her death during a battle with Calculator.[61] With most of the criminal underworld now believing that she is dead, Oracle cuts off ties with all but a select few Gotham heroes, and is shown refusing to help Blue Beetle, Manhunter, and Booster Gold when they attempt to call her for assistance during battle.[62]

In Grant Morrison's Batman: The Return (2010), an installment of the limited series Bruce Wayne: The Road Home (2010), Batman enlists Oracle to help him run Batman Incorporated, a new global team of Batmen. He tasks her with helping him fight crime on a virtual front and shows her a new modified Batgirl design that acts as her virtual avatar.[63] Oracle is later shown directing Cassandra Cain, now known as "Black Bat", on a mission in Hong Kong, where she captures some heroin smugglers for Batman.[64] In Scott Snyder's Black Mirror storyline, Barbara Gordon is kidnapped by her brother, James Gordon Jr., who had returned to Gotham after a lengthy absence to become a serial killer.[65] He stabs her in both of her legs, positioning the knives so that if she removes them, she will bleed to death. As she slowly bleeds, she can use her wits to distract him long enough for Batman and Commissioner Gordon to arrive and defeat her brother.[66]

In September 2011, following the company-wide relaunch, Barbara Gordon stars in a new Batgirl series—one of The New 52 titles featuring the company's most iconic characters. The conclusion of the limited series Flashpoint (2011) establishes a new continuity within the DC Universe, with all characters regressing to a younger age and earlier stage in their careers while remaining in a modern timeline. DC Senior VP of Sales, Bob Wayne, explained that with each of their titles reverting to issue #1, "our creative teams have the ability to take a more modern approach—not only with each character, but with how the characters interact with one another and the universe as a whole, and focus on the earlier part of the careers of each of our iconic characters."[67] Barbara Gordon is biological daughter of James Gordon and Barbara Eileen Gordon in this continuity. Wayne also stated that "The Killing Joke still happened and she was Oracle. Now she will go through physical rehabilitation and become a more seasoned and nuanced character because she had these incredible and diverse experiences.[67] Public reaction to the change has been mixed and has included criticism that DC has reduced the diversity of their character lineup, as well as "being disrespectful of the power the character had gained as a symbol to the disabled community in her role as Oracle."[68][69][70]

DC Comics co-publisher Dan DiDio explained the decision by stating that "[w]e didn't want to turn our back on the diversity issue, but she'll always be the most recognizable [Batgirl]. We are working with concerns to diversify the line. We're always looking to re-position to be reflective of today's audience."[71] Gail Simone, who will be writing the series, stated: "For many years, I got to write the character as Oracle, and there is to this day, no character who means more to me. This is classic Barbara as she was originally conceived, with a few big surprises. It's a bit of a shock, to be sure, but we're doing everything we can to be respectful to this character's amazing legacy, while presenting something thrilling that a generation of comics readers will be experiencing for the first time ... Barbara Gordon leaping, fighting, and swinging over Gotham. Now, when citizens of that city look up, they are going to see BATGIRL. And that is absolutely thrilling."[72]

In the new, revised continuity, the events of The Killing Joke took place three years before the current storyline, and while it is established she was paraplegic during that time, Barbara Gordon is written as having regained her mobility after undergoing experimental surgery at a South African clinic.[73] Series writer Gail Simone stated that while the character is "one of the smartest and toughest women in comics ... One thing the book is truly about, is that the after-effects of something like PTSD (post-traumatic stress disorder) or other trauma-related syndromes, can strike even very smart, very intellectually tough people, even soldiers and cops", a subject that is generally overlooked in comic books. She also explained the method of the character's recovery is based upon real-life experiences in that "some of the best real world work in the field of mobility rehabilitation is coming from South Africa. People have been talking about this as if it's some sort of mystical thing like returning from the dead, but there are treatments and surgeries that can restore mobility in some cases. Barbara's spine was not severed. That makes her a candidate."[73]

Prior to release, Batgirl #1 sold out at the distribution level with over 100,000 copies printed in its first run according to Diamond Comic Distributors. Along with Action Comics #1, Justice League #1, Batman #1, Batman and Robin #1, Batman: The Dark Knight #1, Detective Comics #1, Flash #1, Green Lantern #1, and Superman #1, retailers were required to order a second printing.[74][75] Calvin Reid of Publishers Weekly states in a review of the first issue: "The artwork is okay though conventional, while Simone's script tries to tie up of the end of the previous Barbara Gordon/Oracle storyline and setup up the new Batgirl. Her formula: murderous villains, blood splattering violence and high flying superheroics mixed with single-white-female bonding ... plus a cliffhanger ending to the first issue that offers a nifty [segue] into the new world of Barbara Gordon and Batgirl."[76] The New York Times critic George Gene Gustines wrote: "Unlike some of the other DC comics I read this week, Batgirl achieves a deft hat trick: a well-shaped reintroduction to a character, an elegant acknowledgement of fundamental history and the establishment of a new status quo. This is a must-buy series."[77] Earning a B+ rating in a review from Entertainment Weekly, Ken Tucker writes that Simone "[takes] her Birds of Prey storytelling powers and focuses them on the newly revived Barbara Gordon as Batgirl. The result is a burst of exhilaration, as Barbara/Batgirl revels in her new freedom even as she encounters a so-far not-terribly-chilling villain called Mirror."[78]

Since the series relaunch in September 2011, Batgirl has remained within the top 30 of the 300 best-selling monthly comic book publications sold in North America. Monthly estimated sales figures are as follows: Batgirl #1 with 81,489 copies (ranked 12th overall),[79] Batgirl #2 with 75,227 (ranked 14th),[80] Batgirl #3 with 62,974 (ranked 18th),[81] Batgirl #4 with 53,975 (ranked 23rd),[82] Batgirl #5 with 51,327 (ranked 26th),[83] and Batgirl #6 with 47,836 (ranked 30th).[84] The hardcover edition of volume 1, Batgirl: The Darkest Reflection, which collects issues #1–6, made The New York Times Best Seller list, alongside Animal Man: The Hunt, Batman & Robin: Born to Kill, Batman: Detective Comics, Wonder Woman: Blood, Batwoman: Hydrology, Green Lantern: Sinestro.[85]

Additionally, Barbara Gordon makes an appearance in Birds of Prey #1, where Black Canary offers her a spot on the new Birds of Prey roster. She declines Canary's invitation, suggesting that Katana take her place instead.[86] Series writer Duane Swierczynski has stated that Batgirl will join the team in issue #4.[87] He commented that while she "is an essential part of this team", she is not the focus of the series, as she is hesitant to be associated with the other characters because of their status as outlaws.[88]

In October 2014, the monthly Batgirl title underwent a soft reboot with the new creative team Brenden Fletcher (writer) Cameron Stewart (writer, layouts), Babs Tarr (artist) and Maris Wicks (colors). The first six-issue story explored Barbara Gordon's attempt to start a new life as a PhD student in the hip Gotham borough of Burnside. While seemingly light and engaging compared to Gail Simone's darker preceding run, the new arc ultimately dealt with Babs' inability to fully escape her earlier trauma and the villain was revealed as her own brain scans, an algorithm similar to the pre-New 52 Oracle.[89] While the reboot was highly praised for its innovative use of social media, its fun and energy, and particularly for Tarr's art,[90] several critics condemned the villain Dagger Type in issue #37 as a transphobic caricature.[91][92][93] In response, the creative team issued a joint apology and revised the issue for the subsequent collected edition, Batgirl Vol. 1: The Batgirl of Burnside.[94][95]

On March 13, 2015, DC Comics released 25 Joker-themed variant covers for its various monthly series for release that June, in celebration of the character's 75th anniversary. Among them was a cover to Batgirl #41 by artist Rafael Albuquerque that took its inspiration from The Killing Joke. The cover depicts the Joker standing next to a tearful Batgirl, who has a red smile painted across her mouth. The Joker has one hand holding a revolver draped over Batgirl's shoulder and is pointing to her cheek with the other hand as if gesturing to shoot her.

The cover quickly drew criticism for highlighting a dark period in the character's history, especially when juxtaposed with the youthful, more optimistic direction of the series at the time. The hashtag #changethecover drew hundreds of posts on Twitter and Tumblr asking DC to not release the variant. DC ultimately withdrew the cover from publication at the request of Albuquerque, who stated, "My intention was never to hurt or upset anyone through my art...For that reason, I have recommended to DC that the variant cover be pulled."[96]

In March 2016, DC Comics announced it would be relaunching all of its monthly titles in an initiative called DC Rebirth. The relaunch restored elements of the pre-"Flashpoint" DC continuity while maintaining elements of The New 52 as well.[97] The DC Rebirth Batgirl would remain Barbara Gordon,[98] who would star in two monthly series: Batgirl (vol. 5), written by Hope Larson, and Batgirl and the Birds of Prey, written by Julie Benson and Shawna Benson.[99] The two comic book titles debuted in July[100] and August 2016, respectively.[101] In volume five of Batgirl, Barbara Gordon is a student attending Burnside College in the trendy Burnside neighborhood of Gotham City.[102]

Barbara later resumes her role as Oracle, providing comms and tactical support to the Birds of Prey and the Batman Family once again, as part of the 2020 Infinite Frontier relaunch, which restores much of the DC Universe status quo from before The New 52. She takes on the role during the Joker War storyline when the team needs a greater tactical advantage than ever to overcome the Joker's latest plot, and after her spinal support implant begins to show signs of overuse. However, she retains the right to join Cassandra Cain and Stephanie Brown in suiting up as Batgirl again in the future.

In the Knight Terrors story arc of 2023, Batgirl engages battle with Punchline and Royal Flush Gang, after discovering them trying to infiltrate the Clock Tower while other members of the Batfamily are away in the Knightmare Realm.[103]

Various alterations of the Barbara Gordon character have appeared in storylines published in and out of mainstream continuity titles. Variants of the character within continuity often appear in stories that involve time travel, such as the crossover limited series Zero Hour: Crisis in Time, a follow-up story preceded by the 1985 limited series Crisis on Infinite Earths which altered mainstream continuity. Notable imprints of DC Comics such as Elseworlds and All Star DC Comics have also featured alternate versions of the character.

Barbara Gordon, as both Batgirl and Oracle, has made several appearances in Elseworlds comics since 1997. The Elseworlds imprint takes the company's iconic characters and places them in alternate timelines, places and events making heroes "as familiar as yesterday seem as fresh as tomorrow."[104] The character is given starring roles in the noir-style storyline Thrillkiller: Batgirl & Robin (1997),[105] its sequel Batgirl + Batman: Thrillkiller '62 (1998),[106] and the one-shot comic Elseworld's Finest: Supergirl & Batgirl (1998),[107] all of which depict worlds where Barbara is Gotham's first bat-themed hero (Bruce Wayne is a police detective who becomes Batman in the 1960s-set Thrillkiller series, and merely serves as essentially her 'Alfred' in Elseworld's Finest in a timeline where Jim Gordon was killed rather than the Waynes).

In addition, the character has supporting roles in JLA: The Nail (1998), JLA: Created Equal (2000),[108] Superman & Batman: Generations (2003),[109] Batman: Year 100 (2006), and Batman: Earth One (2012). A version of her appears as "Nightwing" in the Smallville comic series, replacing Stephanie Brown as previously promoted.[110]

Barbara Gordon aka Nightwing is featured as Batman's partner in the Smallville Season 11 digital comic based on the TV series, in addition to being a valued member of Wayne Enterprises R&D.[111]

In 2005, DC Comics launched its All-Star imprint—an ongoing series of comics designed to pair the company's most iconic characters with the most acclaimed writers and artists in the industry. Similar to Elseworlds, All-Star is not restricted to continuity and establishes a fresh perspective for the latest generation of readership. According to Dan DiDio, "[t]hese books are created to literally reach the widest audience possible, and not just the comic book audience, but anyone who has ever wanted to read or see anything about Superman or Batman."[112]

An alternate Barbara Gordon was adapted into Frank Miller's All Star Batman and Robin the Boy Wonder (2005) as a teenage Batgirl. In addition, another variation of the character had been set to star in an eponymous All Star Batgirl title, written by Geoff Johns; however, the series was canceled prior to publication.[113]

In Batgirl: Futures End #1 (Nov. 2014), set in an alternate future, a trio of Batgirls include Casandra Cain, Stephanie Brown, and newcomer Tiffany Fox—the daughter of Lucius Fox and the first African American character to be portrayed as Batgirl.[114]

In 2015, DC began publishing DC Bombshells, a title that places its characters in an alternate history primarily set during the 1930s and 1940s. In digital issue #42 (collected as print issue #14), Harley Quinn tells Pamela Isley about encountering "the Belle of the Bog", who appears to be a vampire version of Batgirl.[115] DC Comics Bombshells Annual #1, published on 31 August 2016, reveals that Barbara Gourdon was a French fighter pilot during World War I. After she lost her boyfriend during the war, she traveled to Louisiana and did indeed become a vampire.[116]

In the Batman '89 miniseries (which takes place in an alternate continuity of the Tim Burton films), Barbara Gordon is a Sergeant in the GCPD and Harvey Dent's fiancée. She has a strained relationship with her father and works with Dent to bring Batman down as both see him as a threat. She turns on Dent after a freak accident disfigured his face and drove him to become a criminal and attempted to arrest him, but her efforts were thwarted by Catwoman. Following the deaths of both her father and Dent, she receives a posthumous package from Dent revealing Batman's secret identity and a letter from Catwoman offering her partnership to incriminate Batman and Gotham's power elite.[117][118]

One could argue that curing Barbara and allowing her to be Batgirl again would simply allow her to do more good fighting crime than she ever could in a wheelchair, but then you look insensitive to the ability and usefulness she has in other capacities as Oracle. Conversely, you could say that removing Barbara from her wheelchair drastically alters her character, but then wouldn't that indicate that this is a character defined by her handicap? This begs the question of why so many fans adore her: is it because she's a bold and daring leader that rivals the Calculator in brains? Or is it because she's all of that, but stuck in a wheelchair? Think about the question, and surely many of you will find an answer you don't like.

In the aftermath of Batman: The Killing Joke, Barbara Gordon's paralysis has been the subject of debate, with arguments in favor of, and against, restoring her mobility. Writers, artists, editorial staff, and critics have spoken at great length about the nature of the subject, citing responses from the readership, issues of sexism, diversity, and representation, as well as other considerations that have impacted decisions regarding the character's portrayal.

Reacting to The Killing Joke and Barbara Gordon's later character development as Oracle in Batman: Gotham Knights, Ray Tate, a reviewer at Comics Bulletin, wrote "[t]here is absolutely no reason why Barbara Gordon should be in a wheelchair. Alan Moore and Brian Bolland meant The Killing Joke as an imaginary tale dealing with the iconography of Batman and the Joker ... [Batman] himself is a certifiable genius in biochemistry. There are countless examples of Batman employing that which is only theoretical in his fight against crime. His knowledge of stem cell technology should surpass that of the real world. There is simply no reason for Barbara Gordon to be confined to that wheelchair."[120] Regarding her representation as a character living with a disability, and her effectiveness as a hero compared to her incarnation as Batgirl, Tate asserts "[i]t's ridiculous to think somebody wakes up thinking how lucky they are to be confined to a wheelchair, and yet the attitude around DC and among the fans is that Oracle is the better character over Batgirl because of her handicap. Rubbish. Batgirl has fought more crime and done more to aid Batman as Batgirl than she has as Oracle. Batgirl has saved Batman's life on numerous occasions. Oracle has not. Barbara in this incarnation is not a bad character, but she is not better because she no longer hunts the night in cape and cowl."[120] In an article for Bitch magazine entitled "The Cold Shoulder: Saving Superheroines from Comic-book Violence", Shannon Cochran noted a long history of inequality regarding the treatment of female heroes. She quotes Gail Simone, who discussed the gender difference in the treatment of Batman and Batgirl regarding paralysis: "Both had their backs broken [Batman broke his in a dramatic Batcave confrontation with the villain Bane; Batgirl broke hers when she was ambushed in her home and shot in the spine by the Joker, never given a chance to fight]. Less than a year later, Batman was fine. Batgirl—now named Oracle—was in a wheelchair and remained so for many years."[26]

Artist Alex Ross and writer/producer Paul Dini made attempts to return the character to her original conception. Ross explained in an interview that he and Dini had planned to restore her mobility by placing her in a Lazarus Pit, a naturally occurring chemical pool in the DC Universe that has rejuvenating effects when a person is submerged within it. He stated that "we pitched then-Batman editor Denny O'Neil with these drawings of that costume design. The idea of using the red instead of the traditional yellow was meant to invoke the idea that coming from the Lazarus Pit, she was in a way, more compromised as a character ... Denny shot it down, because, according to him, everybody loves Barbara Gordon as Oracle and as a handicapped character. The theory was that DC didn't have enough handicapped characters, so they weren't going to do anything with Barbara as she was. And the design went into the drawer."[121] Kate Kane, the modern Batwoman introduced during 52, wears a variation of what would have been Gordon's new Batgirl costume designed by Ross.[122]

Without much fanfare, Barbara Gordon has become the most popular handicapped character since Charles Xavier ... There WAS some idea of her being a role model ... We wanted her to cope with what had happened to her and becoming, in many ways, more effective as Oracle than she ever was as Batgirl. And we knew that others with disabilities might look at her and feel good reading about her ... I don't think people 'dance around' her disabilities as they don't want to focus on them but her character. These shouldn't be stories about a disabled person; they are stories about a compelling fascinating character who HAPPENS to be in a wheelchair and I think that's correct. Barbara isn't her handicap; there's more to her than that.

Although critical reception of Barbara Gordon's evolution into Oracle has been mixed among critics and other observers, according to John Ostrander: "We have, over the years, on those occasions when I have worked with the character, gotten some letters from those who have disabilities of one stripe or another and all have been very supportive. I feel very proud for my part in creating Oracle."[123] Supporters of Oracle argue that the Barbara Gordon character provides a greater service to DC Comics and its readers as a disabled character, regardless of the events that caused her paralysis. In her persona as Oracle, Barbara Gordon is not limited to the Batman Family, serving a unique and universal role in the DC universe. DC Senior Vice President Dan DiDio comments, "Some stories ... are so strong that undoing them would be a crime. The DCU would be a lesser place without Barry's sacrifice or the crippling of Barbara at the hands of the Joker."[124]

The character went through possible restoration during Birds of Prey when she is infected with microscopic machines known as nanites by the supervillain Brainiac, which attempted to repair her DNA. Marc Dipaolo, author of War, Politics and Superheroes: Ethics and Propaganda in Comics and Film (2011) commented that DC writers and editors would not allow her to recover completely, and that "[t]he decision was made because there were not enough handicapped superheroes in the DC Universe to justify 'curing' one, and because it would have been odd to see Barbara Gordon escape from her wheelchair in the world of fiction when Christopher Reeve never had that opportunity."[125]

In June 2011, DC announced that Barbara Gordon would be returning to the role of Batgirl in September 2011, in her own eponymous monthly comic, as part of a company-wide relaunch of all of their titles. In addition, former Birds of Prey writer Gail Simone would be writing the series.[72] This announcement became one of the most controversial aspects of the DC Comics relaunch.[126] Supporters of Barbara Gordon in her persona as Oracle expressed dismay over losing an iconic character for the disabled community. Journalist and blogger Jill Pantozzi, who is diagnosed with muscular dystrophy, stated that "people being disabled is part of the real world, it is essential it be part of the fictional world as well... Writer Kevin Van Hook did a great job showing what disabled individuals have to go through in the mini-series Oracle: The Cure. It's that type of honesty I expect more of ... While some diverse characters were mishandled over the years, Oracle was always treated with the utmost respect but this move is the most disrespectful I've seen in a long time."[68] Gail Simone responded directly by stating that at times when others had attempted to restore Gordon's mobility, she fought to keep her as a disabled character, even in light of requests from readers who also had disabilities that wished to see the character healed.[127] However, part of her reasoning for reversing her decision and writing Batgirl with Gordon as the title character was that "[a]rms and legs get ripped off, and they grow back, somehow. Graves don't stay filled. But the one constant is that Barbara stays in that chair. Role model or not, that is problematic and uncomfortable, and the excuses to not cure her, in a world of purple rays and magic and super-science, are often unconvincing or wholly meta-textual. And the longer it goes on, the more it has stretched credibility. But now, everything has changed. If nearly everyone in the DCU, not just Batgirl but almost everyone, is now at a much earlier stage in their career, then my main objection no longer applies, because we are seeing Barbara at an earlier starting point."[127]

Former Batman writer and editor Dennis O'Neil and Oracle co-creator John Ostrander have expressed disappointment over the change. O'Neil stated that during his tenure at DC, "[W]e had hordes of people in spandex beating up criminals ... We didn't have anybody like Oracle, who overcame a disability and was just as valuable and just as effective in a way that didn't involve violence."[128] However, he also stated that from an alternate point of view, "Barbara Gordon's perception in the mainstream public as Batgirl would be a very valid consideration."[128] Ostrander continues to view Oracle as a stronger character than Batgirl but has also expressed faith in Gail Simone's skills as a writer. He commented that "[t]imes change and characters and people evolve. I changed things when I wrote characters, including changing Barbara to Oracle. Others do the same for this era ... Gail Simone is a good friend and a wonderful writer and I'm sure her work will be wonderful."[128]

At the time of her conception, Barbara Gordon's character was intended to reflect the women's liberation movement as an educated, career-oriented young woman, as well as a capable crimefighter. Batgirl is considered to be one of the most popular characters to have emerged during the Silver Age of Comic Books.[9] In The Supergirls: Fashion, Feminism, Fantasy, and the History of Comic Book Heroines (2009), author Mike Madrid states: "While she embodied the spirit of a new wave of liberated superheroines, in the backdrop of the history of comic books, Batgirl carried on the tradition of the gutsy female vigilantes of the '40s who struck out on their own to right wrongs."[8] Although she is discouraged by Batman to engage in crime-fighting, she defiantly ignores his objections.[129] Her career choice as a librarian is speculated to be due in part to the fact that it works as a convincing cover for her much more dangerous work as Batgirl. To conceal her identity from not only her enemies, but her father, Commissioner Gordon, and Batman and Robin, she initially conforms to appearance and personality traits stereotypical of a librarian. In her civilian identity, she is seen with her hair "tied up tightly in a bun. And she wears traditionally conservative—not to say dowdy—clothing. In other words, she embodies the stereotypical image of the female librarian of the day—busy doing clerical tasks while attired and made up in such a way as to guarantee to minimize whatever physical attractiveness she might possess beneath her frumpy exterior."[9] Although her introduction was intended to embody feminist ideology, aspects of her persona were also considered to be sexist, such as the fact that "[m]uch of her arsenal was carried in a Bat-purse attached to her utility belt[.]"[129]

Despite shortcomings in her characterization during the late 1960s, "by the early 1970s, Batgirl had matured, using her keen intellect, athletic dexterity, and burgeoning detective skills to solve petty and not-so-petty thefts". Her color scheme from the  Adventures of Batman cartoon is used as her primary outfit.[129] However, by the end of the Bronze Age of Comic Books in the mid-1980s (and with the dark, gritty influence of Frank Miller's work on the Batman-related titles), Batgirl became less valuable to the franchise "where there was not as much room for a librarian fighting crime in high heels".[27] In this environment, Barbara Gordon becomes increasingly skeptical of her effectiveness as Batgirl until she decides to give up crime-fighting permanently.[129]

Robin Anne Reid, in her 2008 book, Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy: Overviews notes a lack of characterization given to Barbara Gordon by Alan Moore in Batman: The Killing Joke, stating, "Barbara Gordon was not portrayed as the intelligent and resourceful woman who assumed the Batgirl persona; she was portrayed as a cocoa-serving homemaker overly concerned with the mess her father was making cutting and pasting news clippings."[130] Following the character's recreation as Oracle, she is shown having overcome her paralysis at the hands of the Joker by utilizing her intellect to once again engage in crime-fighting as an information broker. Speaking on her characterization as a person living with a disability, comic writer Devin Grayson stated that being "[h]yper-defensive about her [paralysis], she has, if anything, overcompensated. However, her very determination to remain self-reliant, though admirable and inspiring, has made her less willing than ever to accept support or aid of any kind."[131]

A defining characteristic of Barbara Gordon is her sense of morality, which differs from that of Batman and her primary field agent Black Canary. She has demonstrated a willingness to use lethal force, such as in Chuck Dixon's Birds of Prey issue #10, "State of War", which contradicts the methodology used by her closest allies and most DC Comics characters. Dixon stated in an interview that "[s]he's less morally conflicted than other characters. She's very 'means to an end' oriented. She sees that sometimes you have to kill to save lives. She's not comfortable with that but accepts it. She would do anything to avoid using deadly force but, when push comes to shove, she'll drop the hammer."[132] She demonstrates a similar moral ambiguity in Gail Simone's Birds of Prey: Of Like Minds when she argues with Black Canary over using illegally obtained information, which denies criminals the right of due process.[133] Although the Huntress has never been opposed to using lethal force, she also comes into conflict with Oracle over the fact that she will use the psychological impact of a mission to subconsciously manipulate her field agents into conforming to her ideology.[134]

In an interview, Simone explained her fondness for Barbara Gordon, stating: "Kim Yale and John Ostrander picked up the character and made her into a brilliant master computer operator and one of the most fascinating characters in comics. From there, Chuck Dixon did wonderful things with her in his Birds of Prey run ... She's fantastic because even just sitting in a chair in a dark room by herself, she's tremendously compelling. The DCU without her would be a much less interesting place."[37]

As part of DC Comics' 2011 relaunch, The New 52, Barbara Gordon's paralysis is described as lasting only three years. In Batgirl (volume 4), the character's age is reduced, and she is depicted as a recent college graduate, having earned a degree in forensic psychology.[135] Although she resumes her work as Batgirl one year after recovering her mobility, she continues to have posttraumatic stress disorder, causing her to hesitate in battle when exposed to gunfire that could result in receiving new spinal damage.[73] The character also exhibits survivor guilt because she has made a full recovery from her paralysis while others have not.[73] In a September 2011 interview, Gail Simone stated, "I'm enjoying writing Batgirl at this stage in her life. She's younger, she doesn't know everything, she's been immersed in school and her life plan. Events conspire to change that plan, and she's nervous about that. I love writing Barbara under pretty much any conditions, but this really is a key time for her."[136]
In Batgirl #45, Barbara Gordon began a romantic relationship with Luke Fox, the son of Lucius Fox and the new Batwing.[137][138] Some of the character's background and previous relationships were erased. According to the artist of the new Batgirl series, Babs Tarr, Barbara Gordon and Dick Grayson were never romantically involved in the New 52 continuity.[139]

For DC's 2016 DC Rebirth launch, Barbara Gordon headlines two monthly series: Batgirl (vol. 5) and Batgirl and the Birds of Prey. Batgirl (vol. 5), which is written by Hope Larson and illustrated by Rafael Albuquerque, begins with Barbara touring Asia to train with Eastern fighters.[140] Batgirl and the Birds of Prey, which is written by Julie and Shawna Benson, and is illustrated by Claire Roe, reunites her with former teammates the Black Canary and the Huntress (Helena Bertinelli).[141] The first arc of the series restores her prior history as "Oracle", as the team works to track down an impostor using the alias.[142] In the DC Rebirth continuity, Barbara continues to operate in Burnside after training in Asia.[143] She also shows a renewed romantic interest in Dick Grayson, but is unsuccessful due to him already being in a relationship.[144]

At the conclusion of the Joker War story arc (which spanned several Batfamily titles), Barbara Gordon appears to take a break as Batgirl and, for now, shift more to working tech support again as Oracle. Many critics and fans have expressed interest in having Barbara as both Batgirl and Oracle, since she's capable of doing both.[145][146] Batman & the Outsiders Issue 17 and The Joker War Zone indicate that Cassandra Cain (aka Orphan) and Stephanie Brown (aka Spoiler) will both be Batgirls again.[147][148][149]

According to the character's fictional biography, Barbara Gordon trained in Boxing, Capoeira, Judo,[150][151] Kung Fu, Eskrima,[34] Karate,[152] Kickboxing, Jujutsu,[38] Muay Thai, and Taekwondo earning black belts prior to her tenure as Batgirl and is described as being a "star athlete."[23] Following the events of The Killing Joke, Barbara Gordon continued to train in martial arts as Oracle, despite being paralyzed from the waist down. She has extensive skills with eskrima fighting sticks, small firearms, and batarangs; she customarily keeps a pair of eskrima sticks stored in the armrests of her wheelchair as a contingency. In the revised continuity of The New 52, she reflects on the fact that she has been taking self-defense training since age 6 in Batgirl #0 (2012).

Gordon is written as having a genius-level intellect and naturally possessing a photographic memory.[153] She is described by Gail Simone as the most intelligent member of the Batman family and among all characters having operated out of Gotham City.[154] Prior to the character's career as a vigilante, Barbara Gordon developed many technological skills, including vast knowledge of computers and electronics, expert skills as a hacker, and graduate training in library sciences. Like Batman, Barbara Gordon originally used a wide variety of computer electronics and gadgets during her early adventures as Batgirl. These included an infrared scanner built into the cowl of her costume, various bat-inspired weaponry, and the Batcycle. According to Gail Simone, Oracle maintains control over the 12 technologically advanced satellites that were created by Lex Luthor during his tenure as President of the United States.[155]

As Oracle, Barbara Gordon placed her considerable skills and knowledge at the disposal of many of the DC Universe's heroes.[153] She is a skilled hacker, capable of retrieving and dispersing information from private satellites, military installations, government files, and the properties of Lex Luthor.[134] Batman, himself a genius with a wide knowledge base and access to vast information resources, routinely consults Oracle for assistance. Writer and editor Dennis O'Neil, who first established Oracle as Batman's intellectual equal and source of information, stated that "[i]t was logical for her to be there in Batman's world ... Batman would need someone like that."[128]

Since her debut in the DC Comics publication, and fueled by her adaptation into the Batman television series in 1967, Barbara Gordon has been listed among fictional characters that are regarded as cultural icons.[156] Author Brian Cronin, in Was Superman A Spy?: And Other Comic Book Legends Revealed (2009) notes that following her 1967 debut, "Batgirl was soon popular enough to appear regularly over the next two decades and Yvonne Craig certainly made an impression on many viewers with her one season portraying young Ms. Gordon."[27] Similarly, Cronin states that following the publication of The Killing Joke, Barbara Gordon—in her new persona as Oracle—became "more popular, in fact, than she was when she was Batgirl. She even gained her own title, Birds of Prey, about her and a group of superhero operatives she organizes[.]"[27] The character has been the subject of analysis in academia, regarding the portrayal of women, librarians, and disabled people in mainstream media. Throughout the character's history, Barbara Gordon's intelligence has been one of her defining attributes. According to BusinessWeek, she is listed as one of the top ten most intelligent fictional superheroes appearing in American comics and is the only female character to appear on the list.[157] In 2011, Barbara Gordon was ranked 17th in both IGN's "Top 100 Comic Book Heroes" and Comics Buyer's Guide's "100 Sexiest Women in Comics".[3][158]

In The Supergirls: Fashion, Feminism, Fantasy, and the History of Comic Book Heroines (2009), author Mike Madrid states that what set Barbara Gordon as Batgirl apart from other female characters was her motivation for crime-fighting. Unlike Batwoman who preceded her, "she wears his symbol on her chest, but she is not his girlfriend or faithful handmaiden."[8] Because she does not pursue a romantic interest in Batman, "Batgirl is a female Batman can actually regard as a brilliant peer and a partner in the war on crime, the same way he would a male."[8] Historian Peter Sanderson observed that while "Barbara Gordon initially conformed to hackneyed stereotypes as a dowdy librarian ... her transformation into Batgirl could be seen in retrospect as a symbol of the emerging female empowerment movement of the 1960s. (Moreover, by the 1970s Barbara had given herself a makeover even in her 'civilian identity and ran for Congress.)"[159]

In the 1980s, Barbara Kesel, after writing a complaint to DC Comics over the negative portrayal of female characters, was allowed to write for Barbara Gordon in Detective Comics. Robin Anne Reid, in Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy: Overviews (2009), wrote that "Kesel's version of Batgirl established her as a character separate from Batman and Robin: a woman motivated to do what men do, but alone and in her own way. Her Secret Origins (1987) and Batgirl Special (1988) countered the victimized and objectified presentation of Barbara Gordon/Batgirl in Alan Moore's acclaimed The Killing Joke (1988)."[130] She notes that Kesel's interpretation of the character emphasized her intelligence, technological skill, and ability to overcome fear. Commenting on Barbara Gordon's eventual evolution into Oracle, she states "[m]any readers and individuals within the industry believe that Barbara Gordon became a 'better' character after she was paralyzed, but few people comment on specifics of the event that allowed her to become that 'better' character."[130]

In Superheroes and Superegos: Analyzing the Minds Behind the Masks (2010), author Sharon Packer wrote that "[a]nyone who feels that feminist critics overreacted to [Gordon's] accident is advised to consult the source material", calling the work "sadistic to the core."[160] Brian Cronin noted that "[many] readers felt the violence towards Barbara Gordon was too much, and even Moore, in retrospect, has expressed his displeasure with how the story turned out."[27] Jeffrey A. Brown, author of Dangerous Curves: Action Heroines, Gender, Fetishism, and Popular Culture (2011) noted The Killing Joke as an example of the "inherent misogyny of the male-dominated comic book industry" in light of the "relatively unequal violence [female characters] are subjected to."[29] While male characters may be critically injured or killed, they are more than likely to be returned to their original conception, while female characters are more likely to receive permanent damage.[29] Reid states that although speculation behind the editorial decision to allow the paralysis of the character to become permanent included the idea she had become outdated, "if audiences had grown tired of Batgirl, it was not because she was a bad character but because she had been written badly."[130]

Despite views that present the character's Batgirl persona as a symbol of female empowerment, a long-held criticism is that she was originally conceived as an uninspired variation of Batman "rather than standing alone as a leader, such as Wonder Woman" who had no pre-existing male counterpart.[161] In analyzing stereotypes in gender, Jackie Marsh noted that male superheroes (such as Batman) are depicted as hyper-masculine and anti-social, "while female superheroes are reduced to a childlike status by their names" such as the Batgirl character.[162] Professor James B. South, chairman of the Department of Philosophy at Marquette University, stated that Barbara Gordon's character development as Oracle gave her a sense of independence she could not achieve as Batgirl. During her tenure as Batman's protege, "she seems to develop her own style of fighting as Batgirl, [but] she's still basically following in Batman's footsteps."[128] Following The Killing Joke, her recreation as Oracle, and the launch of Birds of Prey, "we see Barbara Gordon as a team leader and her transformation from a girl into a woman."[128]

In The Image and Role of the Librarian (2002), Wendi Arant and Candace R. Benefiel argue that her portrayal as a librarian is considered to be significant to the profession, in that it is represented as a valuable and honorable career. Even because the character abandons it to run for United States Congress, Barbara Gordon is seen as being given a "career switch that even most librarians would consider a step up."[9] In the essay "Librarians, Professionalism and Image: Stereotype and Reality" (2007), Abigail Luthmann views the character less favorably, stating that "[t]he unassuming role of librarian is used as a low-visibility disguise for her crime-fighting alter-ego, and while her information-locating skills may have been useful to her extra-curricular activities no direct examples are given."[163] Unlike her earlier incarnation as Batgirl, "[a]s Oracle, Barbara Gordon is arguably the first true librarian-as-super-hero yet seen in a mainstream comic book (as opposed to a super-hero who happens to be a librarian in his/her private life)."[9] Wendi Arant and Candace R. Benefiel note that Oracle exerts her influence over the DC Universe primarily from home, putting "to full use the information science skills [she] learned on her way to her PhD"[9] In her new persona, "the physically challenged but superbly resourceful Oracle occupies a unique place in the annals of superhero-dom—the 'information goddess' as crime-stopper."[9] Using Barbara Gordon in her role as Oracle, author Sean Wise asserts her character as a model for business networking. In How to Be a Business Superhero: Prepare for Everything, Train with the Best, Make Your Own Destiny at Work (2008) he states that "[o]ver the last decade, Oracle has shown the power of a strong network of contacts, and in doing so she shows Business Superheroes the importance of cultivating contacts and developing assets that can further their collective goals."[164]

Over the years, the American Library Association and DC Comics have collaborated on multiple projects to promote literacy. These efforts frequently involve Barbara Gordon. In 2004, artist Gene Ha created a poster and bookmark that depicted Barbara Gordon walking in a library. Her Batgirl costume appears in a window's reflection. The tagline "Librarians are heroes every day!" appears at the bottom of the poster and bookmark.[165][166] In 2009, a poster featured Barbara Gordon as the Oracle alongside Batman, Nightwing, Robin, the Cassandra Cain version of Batgirl, and Huntress.[167] In 2015, the ALA and DC Comics collaborated on a new set of posters and bookmarks in the ALA's "READ" campaign.[168] By herself, Barbara Gordon appears in the "Batgirl of Burnside" guise as envisioned by Babs Tarr.[169][170] In another design, she appears as the Oracle alongside other members of the extended Bat Family.[171][172]

The book Drawn to the Stacks: Essays on Libraries, Librarians and Archives in Comics and Graphic Novels includes the chapter "Barbara Gordon as Information Literacy Activist in Batgirl: Son of Penguin," which "argues that Gordon’s confrontation with unethical algorithms in the 2017 story arc is a crucial and deeply insightful representation of librarians as an integral part of American society and the pursuit of justice."[173]

Following the character's reinvention as the information broker Oracle, she has been regarded as a symbol of empowerment for disabled people. In Unleashing the Superhero in Us All (2008), author T. James Musler notes that "[f]or quite some time, any handicap was considered insurmountable" citing Franklin D. Roosevelt as an example, who was never photographed in a wheelchair to avoid a perception of weakness.[174] About Barbara Gordon, he states "[r]ather than quitting crime-fighting, Barbara combines her intellect and computer skills to help the superhero community by gathering and passing along information."[174] Her character thus signifies that "[n]o longer is a handicap overwhelming, a person can live a strong good life, handicap or not."[174] In The Superhero Book: The Ultimate Encyclopedia Of Comic-Book Icons And Hollywood Heroes (2004), author Gina Renée Misiroglu observes that while disabled characters in comic books are typically utilized as gimmicks, or—as with Charles Xavier and Daredevil—are introduced with a pre-existing condition as part of their origin myth, "[a]s Oracle... Gordon stands tall as the most empowering disabled superhero. Readers witnessed her tragedy, and watched her rise above it."[131] James B. South's chapter "Barbara Gordon and Moral Perfectionism" in the 2004 book Superheroes and Philosophy analyzes how the changes in her life "from librarian to Batgirl to Oracle" drive her to pursue a higher self, illustrating the philosophical theory of moral perfectionism.[175]

After the character was introduced in Detective Comics #359 in January 1967, at the request of the producers of the 1960s Batman television series, she was introduced into the television series – portrayed by Yvonne Craig – in the season 3 premiere "Enter Batgirl, Exit Penguin", in September that same year.

Les Daniels, in Batman: The Complete History (2004), wrote that the goal of ABC was to "attract new audience members, especially idealistic young girls and less high-minded older men."[4] According to Craig: "I used to think the reason they hired me was because they knew I could ride my own motorcycle ... I realized they hired me because I had a cartoon voice."[4] A shared criticism of Batgirl and other female superheroes portrayed later on television (such as Wonder Woman and the Bionic Woman), is that she was not allowed to engage in hand-to-hand combat on screen.[156] As such, "her fights were choreographed carefully to imitate the moves of a Broadway showgirl through the use of a straight kick to her opponent's face rather than the type of kick a martial artist would use."[156] However, Craig has also stated: "I meet young women who say Batgirl was their role model ... They say it's because it was the first time they ever felt girls could do the same things guys could do, and sometimes better. I think that's lovely."[176] During the early 1970s, Craig portrayed Batgirl once again in a public service announcement to advocate equal pay for women.[161] Since Batman, the character has had a long history of appearances in television and other media.[161] As Batgirl, Barbara Gordon plays a supporting role in a string of animated series, voiced by Jane Webb in The Batman/Superman Hour (1968), Melendy Britt in The New Adventures of Batman (1977), Melissa Gilbert in Batman: The Animated Series (1992), Tara Strong in The New Batman Adventures (1997) and Beware the Batman (2013), Danielle Judovits in The Batman (2004), Mae Whitman in Batman: The Brave and the Bold (2008)[161] and Alyson Stoner in Young Justice (2011). The Batman series also showcased the character's first animated adaptation as Oracle, voiced by Kellie Martin in the episode "Artifacts" (2007). She also appears in DC Super Hero Girls voiced by Mae Whitman in season 1 as Barbara Gordon and season 2 as Batgirl. Other variations of the character that have been adapted into other media include an elderly Barbara Gordon, voiced by Stockard Channing and Angie Harmon in 1999's Batman Beyond, who after retiring as Batgirl, became commissioner of the Gotham City police department.[161]

Dina Meyer starred as Barbara Gordon in the television series Birds of Prey (2002). It became the first adaptation to show the character's progression from Batgirl to Oracle, which included her paralysis at the hands of the Joker. Meyer commented on her character's complex history stating: "She's multidimensional. She was a former superhero. She was extremely active physically for years, fighting alongside Batman. The unfortunate incident with the Joker took away the use of her legs ... but rather than give up and throw in the towel, as she could've done so easily, she went and studied escrima (a martial art), got stronger in her mental state and, while helping out her father on a case one day, realized she had a knack for solving mysteries. And all of a sudden she became this computer genius."[177] Overall, the series received criticism for its emphasis on aesthetics over plot.[178][179] It aired for one season before receiving cancellation. In the fourth season of the TV series Arrow, after Felicity Smoak had a similar paralyzing injury, Oliver Queen gives her the codename Overwatch while commenting that "Oracle" was taken.[180] Although in the comic books Barbara Gordon was never a member of the Teen Titans, she was slated to appear in the live-action Titans series, when originally proposed for TNT. This version of the character was to be a wheelchair-using computer expert, but not yet be known as Oracle. This series was subsequently redeveloped for DC Universe without the character.[181] Barbara made her debut in the third season with Savannah Welch. The series depicted her as the Commissioner of the Gotham City Police Department and retired from her Batgirl persona after an attack from Mr. Freeze that resulted in the death of her father.[182][183][184]

In addition to live-action television and animation, the character has appeared in several video games included in the Batman franchise. She appears in The Adventures of Batman & Robin, Batman: Vengeance, Batman: Rise of Sin Tzu and Batman: The Killing Joke voiced by Tara Strong. She is also in Batman: Dark Tomorrow for the first time as Oracle.[185] She also appears in LEGO Batman for the PC, PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, DS, and PlayStation Portable.[186] She plays a supporting role as Oracle in Batman: Arkham Asylum for the PC, PlayStation 3, and Xbox 360, serving as Batman's guide through Arkham, and is voiced by Kimberly Brooks. She also appears as the radio guide alongside Alfred Pennyworth, as they both serve as Batman's guides in the sequel, Batman: Arkham City. A teenage Barbara also appears in the prequel Batman: Arkham Origins, voiced by Kelsey Lansdowne. In the 2008 live-action film, The Dark Knight, a very young Barbara Gordon is depicted. She is credited as "Gordon's Daughter", while the name "Barbara Gordon" is reserved for Commissioner Gordon's wife. She also acts as the primary contact for hero characters as Oracle in DC Universe Online, voiced by Katherine Catmull for the PC and the PlayStation 3. She assists the player through the tutorial and will offer comments and advice throughout the game including a guided tour of the JLA Watchtower. She is a playable character in Injustice: Gods Among Us, with Kimberly Brooks reprising her role. Barbara has returned in Batman: Arkham Knight where she is voiced by Ashley Greene. In addition, Barbara also appears as a playable character as part of the game's season pass.[187]

Barbara Gordon appears in the 2017 animated film The Lego Batman Movie voiced by Rosario Dawson. She is introduced taking over from her father Jim Gordon to become the new Police Commissioner of Gotham. This allows for the continuation of still having a 'Commissioner Gordon' and gives a more prominent role to the character. She later dons her cowl and teams up with Batman as Batgirl in addition to her role as Commissioner. In March 2017, it was announced that Joss Whedon was in talks to write, direct and produce a Batgirl film as part of the DC Extended Universe.[188] The film would center on Barbara Gordon, with The New 52 comics by Gail Simone serving as "a starting point" for the film.[189] Whedon was to begin production on the film in 2018,[190] but stepped down in February 2018.[191] In April 2018, after impressing the studio with her work on the forthcoming film Birds of Prey, Christina Hodson was hired as screenwriter for Batgirl as well.[192] The studio is actively looking for a female director.[193]

In the final season of Gotham, Barbara Lee Gordon is shown as the baby of Jim Gordon and his ex-fiancée Barbara Kean, named by the latter both after herself and after Jim's wife Dr. Lee Thompkins. Her parents share custody of her. She appears in the final episode portrayed by Jeté Laurence, where she is taken hostage as the debut action of the new Joker, Gordon's attempt to save her being assisted by the new Batman.[194]

Barbara Gordon appears in Harley Quinn as a college student in the second-season episode "Riddle U" where she helps Harley and Poison Ivy take down the Riddler and is seen making her own Batgirl costume.[195]

She's portrayed by Savannah Welch in the third season of the HBO Max series Titans, where she's depicted as the commissioner of the Gotham City Police.[196]

Leslie Grace was slated to portray Barbara Gordon as Batgirl in what would have been her live-action solo film and DCEU debut, Batgirl, which was planned to premiere exclusively on HBO Max but was cancelled in August 2022.[197]

The character also made a non-speaking animated cameo appearance in the 2021 film Space Jam: A New Legacy.Bicycle and motorcycle dynamics is the science of the motion of bicycles and motorcycles and their components, due to the forces acting on them. Dynamics falls under a branch of physics known as classical mechanics. Bike motions of interest include balancing, steering, braking, accelerating, suspension activation, and vibration. The study of these motions began in the late 19th century and continues today.[1][2][3]

Bicycles and motorcycles are both single-track vehicles and so their motions have many fundamental attributes in common and are fundamentally different from and more difficult to study than other wheeled vehicles such as dicycles, tricycles, and quadracycles.[4] As with unicycles, bikes lack lateral stability when stationary, and under most circumstances can only remain upright when moving forward. Experimentation and mathematical analysis have shown that a bike stays upright when it is steered to keep its center of mass over its wheels. This steering is usually supplied by a rider, or in certain circumstances, by the bike itself. Several factors, including geometry, mass distribution, and gyroscopic effect all contribute in varying degrees to this self-stability, but long-standing hypotheses and claims that any single effect, such as gyroscopic or trail (the distance between steering axis and ground contact of the front tire), is solely responsible for the stabilizing force have been discredited.[1][5][6][7]

While remaining upright may be the primary goal of beginning riders, a bike must lean in order to maintain balance in a turn: the higher the speed or smaller the turn radius, the more lean is required. This balances the roll torque about the wheel contact patches generated by centrifugal force due to the turn with that of the gravitational force. This lean is usually produced by a momentary steering in the opposite direction, called countersteering. Unlike other wheeled vehicles, the primary control input on bikes is steering torque, not position.[8]

Although longitudinally stable when stationary, bikes often have a high enough center of mass and a short enough wheelbase to lift a wheel off the ground under sufficient acceleration or deceleration. When braking, depending on the location of the combined center of mass of the bike and rider with respect to the point where the front wheel contacts the ground, and if the front brake is applied hard enough, bikes can either: skid the front wheel which may or not result in a crash; or flip the bike and rider over the front wheel. A similar situation is possible while accelerating, but with respect to the rear wheel.[9]

The history of the study of bike dynamics is nearly as old as the bicycle itself. It includes contributions from famous scientists such as Rankine, Appell, and Whipple.[2] In the early 19th century Karl von Drais, credited with inventing the two-wheeled vehicle variously called the laufmaschine, velocipede, draisine, and dandy horse, showed that a rider could balance his device by steering the front wheel.[2] In 1869, Rankine published an article in The Engineer repeating von Drais' assertion that balance is maintained by steering in the direction of a lean.[10] In 1897, the French Academy of Sciences made understanding bicycle dynamics the goal of its Prix Fourneyron competition. Thus, by the end of the 19th century, Carlo Bourlet, Emmanuel Carvallo, and Francis Whipple had shown with rigid-body dynamics that some safety bicycles could actually balance themselves if moving at the right speed.[2] Bourlet won the Prix Fourneyron, and Whipple won the Cambridge University Smith Prize.[7] It is not clear to whom should go the credit for tilting the steering axis from the vertical which helps make this possible.[11]

In 1970, David E. H. Jones published an article in Physics Today showing that gyroscopic effects are not necessary for a person to balance a bicycle.[6] Since 1971, when he identified and named the wobble, weave and capsize modes,[12] Robin Sharp has written regularly about the behavior of motorcycles and bicycles.[13] While at Imperial College, London, he worked with David Limebeer and Simos Evangelou.[14] In the early 1970s, Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory (CAL, later Calspan Corporation in Buffalo, NY USA) was sponsored by the Schwinn Bicycle Company and others to study and simulate bicycle and motorcycle dynamics. Portions of this work have now been released to the public and scans of over 30 detailed reports have been posted at this TU Delft Bicycle Dynamics site. Since the 1990s, Cossalter, et al., have been researching motorcycle dynamics at the University of Padova. Their research, both experimental and numerical, has covered weave,[15] wobble,[16] chatter,[17] simulators,[18] vehicle modelling,[19] tire modelling,[20][21] handling,[22][23] and minimum lap time maneuvering.[24][25]

In 2007, Meijaard, et al., published the canonical linearized equations of motion, in the Proceedings of the Royal Society A, along with verification by two different methods.[2] These equations assumed the tires to roll without slip, that is to say, to go where they point, and the rider to be rigidly attached to the rear frame of the bicycle.
In 2011, Kooijman, et al., published an article in Science showing that neither gyroscopic effects nor so-called caster effects due to trail are necessary for a bike to balance itself.[1] They designed a two-mass-skate bicycle that the equations of motion predict is self-stable even with negative trail, the front wheel contacts the ground in front of the steering axis, and with counter-rotating wheels to cancel any gyroscopic effects. Then they constructed a physical model to validate that prediction. This may require some of the details provided below about steering geometry or stability to be re-evaluated. Bicycle dynamics was named 26 of Discover's 100 top stories of 2011.[26]
In 2013, Eddy Merckx Cycles was awarded over €150,000 with Ghent University to examine bicycle stability.[27]

If the bike and rider are considered to be a single system, the forces that act on that system and its components can be roughly divided into two groups: internal and external. The external forces are due to gravity, inertia, contact with the ground, and contact with the atmosphere. The internal forces are caused by the rider and by interaction between components.

As with all masses, gravity pulls the rider and all the bike components toward the earth. At each tire contact patch there are ground reaction forces with both horizontal and vertical components. The vertical components mostly counteract the force of gravity, but also vary with braking and accelerating. For details, see the section on longitudinal stability below. The horizontal components, due to friction between the wheels and the ground, including rolling resistance, are in response to propulsive forces, braking forces, and turning forces. Aerodynamic forces due to the atmosphere are mostly in the form of drag, but can also be from crosswinds. At normal bicycling speeds on level ground, aerodynamic drag is the largest force resisting forward motion.[28]: 188  At faster speed, aerodynamic drag becomes overwhelmingly the largest force resisting forward motion.

Turning forces are generated during maneuvers for balancing in addition to just changing direction of travel. These may be interpreted as centrifugal forces in the accelerating reference frame of the bike and rider; or simply as inertia in a stationary, inertial reference frame and not forces at all. Gyroscopic forces acting on rotating parts such as wheels, engine, transmission, etc., are also due to the inertia of those rotating parts. They are discussed further in the section on gyroscopic effects below.

Internal forces, those between components of the bike and rider system, are mostly caused by the rider or by friction. In addition to pedaling, the rider can apply torques between the steering mechanism (front fork, handlebars, front wheel, etc.) and rear frame, and between the rider and the rear frame. Friction exists between any parts that move against each other: in the drive train, between the steering mechanism and the rear frame, etc. In addition to brakes, which create friction between rotating wheels and non-rotating frame parts, many bikes have front and rear suspensions. Some motorcycles and bicycles have a steering damper to dissipate undesirable kinetic energy,[14][29] and some bicycles have a spring connecting the front fork to the frame to provide a progressive torque that tends to steer the bicycle straight ahead. On bikes with rear suspensions, feedback between the drive train and the suspension is an issue designers attempt to handle with various linkage configurations and dampers.[30]

Motions of a bike can be roughly grouped into those out of the central plane of symmetry: lateral; and those in the central plane of symmetry: longitudinal or vertical. Lateral motions include balancing, leaning, steering, and turning. Motions in the central plane of symmetry include rolling forward, of course, but also stoppies, wheelies, brake diving, and most suspension activation. Motions in these two groups are linearly decoupled, that is they do not interact with each other to the first order.[2] An uncontrolled bike is laterally unstable when stationary and can be laterally self-stable when moving under the right conditions or when controlled by a rider. Conversely, a bike is longitudinally stable when stationary and can be longitudinally unstable when undergoing sufficient acceleration or deceleration.

Of the two, lateral dynamics has proven to be the more complicated, requiring three-dimensional, multibody dynamic analysis with at least two generalized coordinates to analyze. At a minimum, two coupled, second-order differential equations are required to capture the principal motions.[2] Exact solutions are not possible, and numerical methods must be used instead.[2] Competing theories of how bikes balance can still be found in print and online. On the other hand, as shown in later sections, much longitudinal dynamic analysis can be accomplished simply with planar kinetics and just one coordinate.

When discussing bike balance, it is necessary to distinguish carefully between "stability", "self-stability", and "controllability". Recent research suggests that "rider-controlled stability of bicycles is indeed related to their self-stability".[1]

A bike remains upright when it is steered so that the ground reaction forces exactly balance all the other internal and external forces it experiences, such as gravitational if leaning, inertial or centrifugal if in a turn, gyroscopic if being steered, and aerodynamic if in a crosswind.[28] Steering may be supplied by a rider or, under certain circumstances, by the bike itself.[31] This self-stability is generated by a combination of several effects that depend on the geometry, mass distribution, and forward speed of the bike. Tires, suspension, steering damping, and frame flex can also influence it, especially in motorcycles.

Even when staying relatively motionless, a rider can balance a bike by the same principle. While performing a track stand, the rider can keep the line between the two contact patches under the combined center of mass by steering the front wheel to one side or the other and then moving forward and backward slightly to move the front contact patch from side to side as necessary. Forward motion can be generated simply by pedaling. Backwards motion can be generated the same way on a fixed-gear bicycle. Otherwise, the rider can take advantage of an opportune slope of the pavement or lurch the upper body backwards while the brakes are momentarily engaged.[32]

If the steering of a bike is locked, it becomes virtually impossible to balance while riding. On the other hand, if the gyroscopic effect of rotating bike wheels is cancelled by adding counter-rotating wheels, it is still easy to balance while riding.[5][6] One other way that a bike can be balanced, with or without locked steering, is by applying appropriate torques between the bike and rider similar to the way a gymnast can swing up from hanging straight down on uneven parallel bars, a person can start swinging on a swing from rest by pumping their legs, or a double inverted pendulum can be controlled with an actuator only at the elbow.[33]

The rider applies torque to the handlebars in order to turn the front wheel and so to control lean and maintain balance. At high speeds, small steering angles quickly move the ground contact points laterally; at low speeds, larger steering angles are required to achieve the same results in the same amount of time. Because of this, it is usually easier to maintain balance at high speeds.[34] As self-stability typically occurs at speeds above a certain threshold, going faster increases the chances that a bike is contributing to its own stability.

The farther forward (closer to front wheel) the center of mass of the combined bike and rider, the less the front wheel has to move laterally in order to maintain balance.[35] Conversely, the farther back (closer to the rear wheel) the center of mass is located, the more front wheel lateral movement or bike forward motion is required to regain balance. This can be noticeable on long-wheelbase recumbents, choppers, and wheelie bikes.[36] It can also be a challenge for touring bikes that carry a heavy load of gear over or even behind the rear wheel.[37] Mass over the rear wheel can be more easily controlled if it is lower than mass over the front wheel.[11]

A bike is also an example of an inverted pendulum. Just as a broomstick is more easily balanced in the hand than a pencil, a tall bike (with a high center of mass) can be easier to balance when ridden than a low one because the tall bike's lean rate (rate at which its angle of lean increases as it begins to fall over) will be slower.[38] However, a rider can have the opposite impression of a bike when it is stationary. A top-heavy bike can require more effort to keep upright, when stopped in traffic for example, than a bike which is just as tall but with a lower center of mass. This is an example of a vertical second-class lever. A small force at the end of the lever, the seat or handlebars at the top of the bike, more easily moves a large mass if the mass is closer to the fulcrum, where the tires touch the ground. This is why touring cyclists are advised to carry loads low on a bike, and panniers hang down on either side of front and rear racks.[39]

A factor that influences how easy or difficult a bike will be to ride is trail, the distance by which the front wheel ground contact point trails behind the steering axis ground contact point. The steering axis is the axis about which the entire steering mechanism (fork, handlebars, front wheel, etc.) pivots. In traditional bike designs, with a steering axis tilted back from the vertical, positive trail tends to steer the front wheel into the direction of a lean, independent of forward speed.[28] This can be simulated by pushing a stationary bike to one side. The front wheel will usually also steer to that side. In a lean, gravity provides this force. The dynamics of a moving bike are more complicated, however, and other factors can contribute to or detract from this effect.[1]

Trail is a function of head angle, fork offset or rake, and wheel size. Their relationship can be described by this formula:[40]

where 




R

w




{\displaystyle R_{w}}

 is wheel radius, 




A

h




{\displaystyle A_{h}}

 is the head angle measured clock-wise from the horizontal and 




O

f




{\displaystyle O_{f}}

 is the fork offset or rake. Trail can be increased by increasing the wheel size, decreasing the head angle, or decreasing the fork rake.

The more trail a traditional bike has, the more stable it feels,[41] although too much trail can make a bike feel difficult to steer. Bikes with negative trail (where the contact patch is in front of where the steering axis intersects the ground), while still rideable, are reported to feel very unstable. Normally, road racing bicycles have more trail than touring bikes but less than mountain bikes. Mountain bikes are designed with less-vertical head angles than road bikes so as to have greater trail and hence improved stability for descents. Touring bikes are built with small trail to allow the rider to control a bike weighed down with baggage. As a consequence, an unloaded touring bike can feel unstable. In bicycles, fork rake, often a curve in the fork blades forward of the steering axis, is used to diminish trail.[42] Bikes with negative trail exist, such as the Python Lowracer, and are rideable, and an experimental bike with negative trail has been shown to be self-stable.[1]

In motorcycles, rake refers to the head angle instead, and offset created by the triple tree is used to diminish trail.[43]

A small survey by Whitt and Wilson[28] found:

However, these ranges are not hard and fast. For example, LeMond Racing Cycles offers [44] both with forks that have 45 mm of offset or rake and the same size wheels:

The amount of trail a particular bike has may vary with time for several reasons. On bikes with front suspension, especially telescopic forks, compressing the front suspension, due to heavy braking for example, can steepen the steering axis angle and reduce trail. Trail also varies with lean angle, and steering angle, usually decreasing from a maximum when the bike is straight upright and steered straight ahead.[45] Trail can decrease to zero with sufficiently large lean and steer angles, which can alter how stable a bike feels.[11] Finally, even the profile of the front tire can influence how trail varies as the bike is leaned and steered.

A measurement similar to trail, called either mechanical trail, normal trail, or true trail,[46] is the perpendicular distance from the steering axis to the centroid of the front wheel contact patch.

A factor that influences the directional stability of a bike is wheelbase, the horizontal distance between the ground contact points of the front and rear wheels. For a given displacement of the front wheel, due to some disturbance, the angle of the resulting path from the original is inversely proportional to wheelbase.[9] Also, the radius of curvature for a given steer angle and lean angle is proportional to the wheelbase.[9] Finally, the wheelbase increases when the bike is leaned and steered. In the extreme, when the lean angle is 90°, and the bike is steered in the direction of that lean, the wheelbase is increased by the radius of the front and rear wheels.[11]

Another factor that can also contribute to the self-stability of traditional bike designs is the distribution of mass in the steering mechanism, which includes the front wheel, the fork, and the handlebar. If the center of mass for the steering mechanism is in front of the steering axis, then the pull of gravity will also cause the front wheel to steer in the direction of a lean. This can be seen by leaning a stationary bike to one side. The front wheel will usually also steer to that side independent of any interaction with the ground.[47] Additional parameters, such as the fore-to-aft position of the center of mass and the elevation of the center of mass also contribute to the dynamic behavior of a bike.[28][47]

The role of the gyroscopic effect in most bike designs is to help steer the front wheel into the direction of a lean. This phenomenon is called precession, and the rate at which an object precesses is inversely proportional to its rate of spin. The slower a front wheel spins, the faster it will precess when the bike leans, and vice versa.[48] The rear wheel is prevented from precessing by friction of the tires on the ground, and so continues to lean as though it were not spinning at all. Hence gyroscopic forces do not provide any resistance to tipping.[49]

At low forward speeds, the precession of the front wheel is too quick, contributing to an uncontrolled bike's tendency to oversteer, start to lean the other way and eventually oscillate and fall over. At high forward speeds, the precession is usually too slow, contributing to an uncontrolled bike's tendency to understeer and eventually fall over without ever having reached the upright position.[11] This instability is very slow, on the order of seconds, and is easy for most riders to counteract. Thus a fast bike may feel stable even though it is actually not self-stable and would fall over if it were uncontrolled.

Another contribution of gyroscopic effects is a roll moment generated by the front wheel during countersteering. For example, steering left causes a moment to the right. The moment is small compared to the moment generated by the out-tracking front wheel, but begins as soon as the rider applies torque to the handlebars and so can be helpful in motorcycle racing.[9] For more detail, see the section countersteering, below, and the countersteering article.

Between the two unstable regimes mentioned in the previous section, and influenced by all the factors described above that contribute to balance (trail, mass distribution, gyroscopic effects, etc.), there may be a range of forward speeds for a given bike design at which these effects steer an uncontrolled bike upright.[2] It has been proven that neither gyroscopic effects nor positive trail are sufficient by themselves or necessary for self-stability, although they certainly can enhance hands-free control.[1]

However, even without self-stability a bike may be ridden by steering it to keep it over its wheels.[6] Note that the effects mentioned above that would combine to produce self-stability may be overwhelmed by additional factors such as headset friction and stiff control cables.[28] This video shows a riderless bicycle exhibiting self-stability.

Longitudinal acceleration has been shown to have a large and complex effect on lateral dynamics. In one study, positive acceleration eliminates self stability, and negative acceleration (deceleration) changes the speeds of self stability.[7]

In order for a bike to turn, that is, change its direction of forward travel, the front wheel must aim approximately in the desired direction, as with any front-wheel steered vehicle. Friction between the wheels and the ground then generates the centripetal acceleration necessary to alter the course from straight ahead as a combination of cornering force and camber thrust. The radius of the turn of an upright (not leaning) bike can be roughly approximated, for small steering angles, by:

where 



r




{\displaystyle r\,\!}

 is the approximate radius, 



w




{\displaystyle w\,\!}

 is the wheelbase, 



δ




{\displaystyle \delta \,\!}

 is the steer angle, and 



ϕ




{\displaystyle \phi \,\!}

 is the caster angle of the steering axis.[9]

However, unlike other wheeled vehicles, bikes must also lean during a turn to balance the relevant forces: gravitational, inertial, frictional, and ground support. The angle of lean, θ, can easily be calculated using the laws of circular motion:

where v is the forward speed, r is the radius of the turn and g is the acceleration of gravity.[48] This is in the idealized case. A slight increase in the lean angle may be required on motorcycles to compensate for the width of modern tires at the same forward speed and turn radius.[45]

It can also be seen however that this simple 2-dimensional model, essentially an inverted pendulum on a turntable, predicts that the steady-state turn is unstable. If the bike is displaced slightly downwards from its equilibrium lean angle, the torque of gravity increases, that of centrifugal force decreases and the displacement gets amplified. A more-sophisticated model that allows a wheel to steer, adjust the path, and counter the torque of gravity, is necessary to capture the self-stability observed in real bikes.

For example, a bike in a 10 m (33 ft) radius steady-state turn at 10 m/s (36 km/h, 22 mph) must be at an angle of 45.6°. A rider can lean with respect to the bike in order to keep either the torso or the bike more or less upright if desired. The angle that matters is the one between the horizontal plane and the plane defined by the tire contacts and the location of the center of mass of bike and rider.

This lean of the bike decreases the actual radius of the turn proportionally to the cosine of the lean angle. The resulting radius can be roughly approximated (within 2% of exact value) by:

where 



r




{\displaystyle r\,\!}

 is the approximate radius, 



w




{\displaystyle w\,\!}

 is the wheelbase, 



θ




{\displaystyle \theta \,\!}

 is the lean angle, 



δ




{\displaystyle \delta \,\!}

 is the steering angle, and 



ϕ




{\displaystyle \phi \,\!}

 is the caster angle of the steering axis.[9] As a bike leans, the tires' contact patches move farther to the side causing wear. The portions at either edge of a motorcycle tire that remain unworn by leaning into turns is sometimes referred to as chicken strips.

The finite width of the tires alters the actual lean angle of the rear frame from the ideal lean angle described above. The actual lean angle between the frame and the vertical must increase with tire width and decrease with center of mass height. Bikes with fat tires and low center of mass must lean more than bikes with skinnier tires or higher centers of mass to negotiate the same turn at the same speed.[9]

The increase in lean angle due to a tire thickness of 2t can be calculated as

where φ is the ideal lean angle, and h is the height of the center of mass.[9] For example, a motorcycle with a 12 inch wide rear tire will have t = 6 inches. If the combined bike and rider center of mass is at a height of 26 inches, then a 25° lean must be increased by 7.28°: a nearly 30% increase. If the tires are only 6 inches wide, then the lean angle increase is only 3.16°, just under half.

The couple created by gravity and the ground reaction forces is necessary for a bicycle to turn at all. On a custom built bicycle with spring-loaded outriggers that exactly cancel this couple, so that the bicycle and rider may assume any lean angle when traveling in a straight line, riders find it impossible to make a turn. As soon as the wheels deviate from a straight path, the bicycle and rider begin to lean in the opposite direction, and the only way to right them is to steer back onto the straight path.[50][51]

To initiate a turn and the necessary lean in the direction of that turn, a bike must momentarily steer in the opposite direction. This is often referred to as countersteering. With the front wheel now at a finite angle to the direction of motion, a lateral force is developed at the contact patch of the tire. This force creates a torque around the longitudinal (roll) axis of the bike, and this torque causes the bike to lean away from the initially steered direction and toward the direction of the desired turn. Where there is no external influence, such as an opportune side wind to create the force necessary to lean the bike, countersteering is necessary to initiate a rapid turn.[48]

While the initial steer torque and steer angle are both opposite the desired turn direction, this may not be the case to maintain a steady-state turn. The sustained steer angle is usually in the same direction as the turn, but may remain opposite to the direction of the turn, especially at high speeds.[52] The sustained steer torque required to maintain that steer angle is usually opposite the turn direction.[53] The actual magnitude and orientation of both the sustained steer angle and sustained steer torque of a particular bike in a particular turn depend on forward speed, bike geometry, tire properties, and combined bike and rider mass distribution.[23] Once in a turn, the radius can only be changed with an appropriate change in lean angle, and this can be accomplished by additional countersteering out of the turn to increase lean and decrease radius, then into the turn to decrease lean and increase radius. To exit the turn, the bike must again countersteer, momentarily steering more into the turn in order to decrease the radius, thus increasing inertial forces, and thereby decreasing the angle of lean.[54]

Once a turn is established, the torque that must be applied to the steering mechanism in order to maintain a constant radius at a constant forward speed depends on the forward speed and the geometry and mass distribution of the bike.[11][23] At speeds below the capsize speed, described below in the section on Eigenvalues and also called the inversion speed, the self-stability of the bike will cause it to tend to steer into the turn, righting itself and exiting the turn, unless a torque is applied in the opposite direction of the turn. At speeds above the capsize speed, the capsize instability will cause it to tend to steer out of the turn, increasing the lean, unless a torque is applied in the direction of the turn. At the capsize speed no input steering torque is necessary to maintain the steady-state turn.

Several effects influence the steering angle, the angle at which the front assembly is rotated about the steering axis, necessary to maintain a steady-state turn. Some of these are unique to single-track vehicles, while others are also experienced by automobiles. Some of these may be mentioned elsewhere in this article, and they are repeated here, though not necessarily in order of importance, so that they may be found in one place.

First, the actual kinematic steering angle, the angle projected onto the road plane to which the front assembly is rotated is a function of the steering angle and the steering axis angle:

where 



Δ




{\displaystyle \Delta \,\!}

 is the kinematic steering angle, 



δ




{\displaystyle \delta \,\!}

 is the steering angle, and 



ϕ




{\displaystyle \phi \,\!}

 is the caster angle of the steering axis.[9]

Second, the lean of the bike decreases the actual radius of the turn proportionally to the cosine of the lean angle. The resulting radius can be roughly approximated (within 2% of exact value) by:

where 



r




{\displaystyle r\,\!}

 is the approximate radius, 



w




{\displaystyle w\,\!}

 is the wheelbase, 



θ




{\displaystyle \theta \,\!}

 is the lean angle, 



δ




{\displaystyle \delta \,\!}

 is the steering angle, and 



ϕ




{\displaystyle \phi \,\!}

 is the caster angle of the steering axis.[9]

Third, because the front and rear tires can have different slip angles due to weight distribution, tire properties, etc., bikes can experience understeer or oversteer. When understeering, the steering angle must be greater, and when oversteering, the steering angle must be less than it would be if the slip angles were equal to maintain a given turn radius.[9] Some authors even use the term counter-steering to refer to the need on some bikes under some conditions to steer in the opposite direction of the turn (negative steering angle) to maintain control in response to significant rear wheel slippage.[9]

Fourth, camber thrust contributes to the centripetal force necessary to cause the bike to deviate from a straight path, along with cornering force due to the slip angle, and can be the largest contributor.[45] Camber thrust contributes to the ability of bikes to negotiate a turn with the same radius as automobiles but with a smaller steering angle.[45] When a bike is steered and leaned in the same direction, the camber angle of the front tire is greater than that of the rear and so can generate more camber thrust, all else being equal.[9]

While countersteering is usually initiated by applying torque directly to the handlebars, on lighter vehicles such as bicycles, it can be accomplished by shifting the rider's weight. If the rider leans to the right relative to the bike, the bike leans to the left to conserve angular momentum, and the combined center of mass remains nearly in the same vertical plane. This leftward lean of the bike, called counter lean by some authors,[45] will cause it to steer to the left and initiate a right-hand turn as if the rider had countersteered to the left by applying a torque directly to the handlebars.[48] This technique may be complicated by additional factors such as headset friction and stiff control cables.

The combined center of mass does move slightly to the left when the rider leans to the right relative to the bike, and the bike leans to the left in response. The action, in space, would have the tires move right, but this is prevented by friction between the tires and the ground, and thus pushes the combined center of mass left. This is a small effect, however, as evidenced by the difficulty most people have in balancing a bike by this method alone.

As mentioned above in the section on balance, one effect of turning the front wheel is a roll moment caused by gyroscopic precession. The magnitude of this moment is proportional to the moment of inertia of the front wheel, its spin rate (forward motion), the rate that the rider turns the front wheel by applying a torque to the handlebars, and the cosine[broken anchor] of the angle between the steering axis and the vertical.[9]

For a sample motorcycle moving at 22 m/s (50 mph) that has a front wheel with a moment of inertia of 0.6 kg·m2, turning the front wheel one degree in half a second generates a roll moment of 3.5 N·m. In comparison, the lateral force on the front tire as it tracks out from under the motorcycle reaches a maximum of 50 N. This, acting on the 0.6 m (2 ft) height of the center of mass, generates a roll moment of 30 N·m.

While the moment from gyroscopic forces is only 12% of this, it can play a significant part because it begins to act as soon as the rider applies the torque, instead of building up more slowly as the wheel out-tracks. This can be especially helpful in motorcycle racing.

Because of theoretical benefits, such as a tighter turning radius at low speed, attempts have been made to construct motorcycles with two-wheel steering. One working prototype by Ian Drysdale in Australia is reported to "work very well".[55][56] Issues in the design include whether to provide active control of the rear wheel or let it swing freely. In the case of active control, the control algorithm needs to decide between steering with or in the opposite direction of the front wheel, when, and how much. One implementation of two-wheel steering, the Sideways bike, lets the rider control the steering of both wheels directly. Another, the Swing Bike, had the second steering axis in front of the seat so that it could also be controlled by the handlebars.

Milton W. Raymond built a long low two-wheel steering bicycle, called "X-2", with various steering mechanisms to control the two wheels independently. Steering motions included "balance", in which both wheels move together to steer the tire contacts under the center of mass; and "true circle", in which the wheels steer equally in opposite directions and thus steering the bicycle without substantially changing the lateral position of the tire contacts relative to the center of mass. X-2 was also able to go "crabwise" with the wheels parallel but out of line with the frame, for instance with the front wheel near the roadway center line and rear wheel near the curb. "Balance" steering allowed easy balancing despite long wheelbase and low center of mass, but no self-balancing ("no hands") configuration was discovered. True circle, as expected, was essentially impossible to balance, as steering does not correct for misalignment of the tire patch and center of mass. Crabwise cycling at angles tested up to about 45° did not show a tendency to fall over, even under braking.[citation needed] X-2 is mentioned in passing in Whitt and Wilson's Bicycling Science 2nd edition.[28]

Because of the theoretical benefits, especially a simplified front-wheel drive mechanism, attempts have been made to construct a rideable rear-wheel steering bike. The Bendix Company built a rear-wheel steering bicycle, and the U.S. Department of Transportation commissioned the construction of a rear-wheel steering motorcycle: both proved to be unrideable. Rainbow Trainers, Inc. in Alton, Illinois, offered US$5,000 to the first person "who can successfully ride the rear-steered bicycle, Rear Steered Bicycle I".[57] One documented example of someone successfully riding a rear-wheel steering bicycle is that of L. H. Laiterman at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, on a specially designed recumbent bike.[28] The difficulty is that turning left, accomplished by turning the rear wheel to the right, initially moves the center of mass to the right, and vice versa. This complicates the task of compensating for leans induced by the environment.[58] Examination of the eigenvalues for bicycles with common geometries and mass distributions shows that when moving in reverse, so as to have rear-wheel steering, they are inherently unstable. This does not mean they are unridable, but that the effort to control them is higher.[59] Other, purpose-built designs have been published, however, that do not suffer this problem.[1][60]

Between the extremes of bicycles with classical front-wheel steering and those with strictly rear-wheel steering is a class of bikes with a pivot point somewhere between the two, referred to as center-steering, and similar to articulated steering. An early implementation of the concept was the Phantom bicycle in the early 1870s promoted as a safer alternative to the penny-farthing.[61] This design allows for simple front-wheel drive and current implementations appear to be quite stable, even rideable no-hands, as many photographs illustrate.[62][63] These designs, such as the Python Lowracer, a recumbent, usually have very lax head angles (40° to 65°) and positive or even negative trail. The builder of a bike with negative trail states that steering the bike from straight ahead forces the seat (and thus the rider) to rise slightly and this offsets the destabilizing effect of the negative trail.[64]

Bicycles have been constructed, for investigation and demonstration purposes, with the steering reversed so that turning the handlebars to the left causes the front wheel to turn to the right, and vica versa. It is possible to ride such a bicycle, but riders experienced with normal bicycles find it very difficult to learn, if they can manage it at all.[65][66]

Tiller effect is the expression used to describe how handlebars that extend far behind the steering axis (head tube) act like a tiller on a boat, in that one moves the bars to the right in order to turn the front wheel to the left, and vice versa. This situation is commonly found on cruiser bicycles, some recumbents, and some motorcycles.[67] It can be troublesome when it limits the ability to steer because of interference or the limits of arm reach.[68]

Tires have a large influence over bike handling, especially on motorcycles,[9][45] but also on bicycles.[7][69] Tires influence bike dynamics in two distinct ways: finite crown radius and force generation. Increase the crown radius of the front tire has been shown to decrease the size or eliminate self stability. Increasing the crown radius of the rear tire has the opposite effect, but to a lesser degree.[7]

Tires generate the lateral forces necessary for steering and balance through a combination of cornering force and camber thrust. Tire inflation pressures have also been found to be important variables in the behavior of a motorcycle at high speeds.[70] Because the front and rear tires can have different slip angles due to weight distribution, tire properties, etc., bikes can experience understeer or oversteer. Of the two, understeer, in which the front wheel slides more than the rear wheel, is more dangerous since front wheel steering is critical for maintaining balance.[9] Because real tires have a finite contact patch with the road surface that can generate a scrub torque, and when in a turn, can experience some side slipping as they roll, they can generate torques about an axis normal to the plane of the contact patch.

One torque generated by a tire, called the self aligning torque, is caused by asymmetries in the side-slip along the length of the contact patch. The resultant force of this side-slip occurs behind the geometric center of the contact patch, a distance described as the pneumatic trail, and so creates a torque on the tire. Since the direction of the side-slip is towards the outside of the turn, the force on the tire is towards the center of the turn. Therefore, this torque tends to turn the front wheel in the direction of the side-slip, away from the direction of the turn, and therefore tends to increase the radius of the turn.

Another torque is produced by the finite width of the contact patch and the lean of the tire in a turn. The portion of the contact patch towards the outside of the turn is actually moving rearward, with respect to the wheel's hub, faster than the rest of the contact patch, because of its greater radius from the hub. By the same reasoning, the inner portion is moving rearward more slowly. So the outer and inner portions of the contact patch slip on the pavement in opposite directions, generating a torque that tends to turn the front wheel in the direction of the turn, and therefore tends to decrease the turn radius.

The combination of these two opposite torques creates a resulting yaw torque on the front wheel, and its direction is a function of the side-slip angle of the tire, the angle between the actual path of the tire and the direction it is pointing, and the camber angle of the tire (the angle that the tire leans from the vertical).[9] The result of this torque is often the suppression of the inversion speed predicted by rigid wheel models described above in the section on steady-state turning.[11]

A highsider is a type of bike motion which is caused by a rear wheel gaining traction when it is not facing in the direction of travel, usually after slipping sideways in a curve.[9] This can occur under heavy braking, acceleration, a varying road surface, or suspension activation, especially due to interaction with the drive train.[71] It can take the form of a single slip-then-flip or a series of violent oscillations.[45]

Bike maneuverability and handling is difficult to quantify for several reasons. The geometry of a bike, especially the steering axis angle makes kinematic analysis complicated.[2] Under many conditions, bikes are inherently unstable and must always be under rider control. Finally, the rider's skill has a large influence on the bike's performance in any maneuver.[9] Bike designs tend to consist of a trade-off between maneuverability and stability.

The primary control input that the rider can make is to apply a torque directly to the steering mechanism via the handlebars. Because of the bike's own dynamics, due to steering geometry and gyroscopic effects, direct position control over steering angle has been found to be problematic.[8]

A secondary control input that the rider can make is to lean the upper torso relative to the bike. As mentioned above, the effectiveness of rider lean varies inversely with the mass of the bike. On heavy bikes, such as motorcycles, rider lean mostly alters the ground clearance requirements in a turn, improves the view of the road, and improves the bike system dynamics in a very low-frequency passive manner.[8] In motorcycle racing, leaning the torso, moving the body, and projecting a knee to the inside of the turn relative to the bike can also cause an aerodynamic yawing moment that facilitates entering and rounding the turn.[9]

The need to keep a bike upright to avoid injury to the rider and damage to the vehicle limits the type of maneuverability testing commonly performed. For example, while automobile enthusiast publications often perform and quote skidpad results, motorcycle publications do not. The need to "set up" for a turn, lean the bike to the appropriate angle, means that the rider must see further ahead than is necessary for a typical car at the same speed, and this need increases more than in proportion to the speed.[8]

Several schemes have been devised to rate the handling of bikes, particularly motorcycles.[9]

Although its equations of motion can be linearized, a bike is a nonlinear system. The variable(s) to be solved for cannot be written as a linear sum of independent components, i.e. its behavior is not expressible as a sum of the behaviors of its descriptors.[2] Generally, nonlinear systems are difficult to solve and are much less understandable than linear systems. In the idealized case, in which friction and any flexing is ignored, a bike is a conservative system. Damping, however, can still be demonstrated: under the right circumstances, side-to-side oscillations will decrease with time. Energy added with a sideways jolt to a bike running straight and upright (demonstrating self-stability) is converted into increased forward speed, not lost, as the oscillations die out.[2]

A bike is a nonholonomic system because its outcome is path-dependent. In order to know its exact configuration, especially location, it is necessary to know not only the configuration of its parts, but also their histories: how they have moved over time. This complicates mathematical analysis.[48] Finally, in the language of control theory, a bike exhibits non-minimum phase behavior.[74] It turns in the direction opposite of how it is initially steered, as described above in the section on countersteering

The number of degrees of freedom of a bike depends on the particular model being used. The simplest model that captures the key dynamic features, called the "Whipple model" after Francis Whipple who first developed the equations for it,[2] has four rigid bodies with knife edge wheels rolling without slip on a flat smooth surface, and has 7 degrees of freedom (configuration variables required to completely describe the location and orientation of all 4 bodies):[2]

The equations of motion of an idealized bike, consisting of

can be represented by a single fourth-order linearized ordinary differential equation or two coupled second-order differential equations,[2] the lean equation

and the steer equation

where

These can be represented in matrix form as 

where

In this idealized and linearized model, there are many geometric parameters (wheelbase, head angle, mass of each body, wheel radius, etc.), but only four significant variables: lean angle, lean rate, steer angle, and steer rate. These equations have been verified by comparison with multiple numeric models derived completely independently.[2]

The equations show that the bicycle is like an inverted pendulum with the lateral position of its support controlled by terms representing roll acceleration, roll velocity and roll displacement to steering torque feedback. The roll acceleration term is normally of the wrong sign for self-stabilization and can be expected to be important mainly in respect of wobble oscillations. The roll velocity feedback is of the correct sign, is gyroscopic in nature, being proportional to speed, and is dominated by the front wheel contribution. The roll displacement term is the most important one and is mainly controlled by trail, steering rake and the offset of the front frame mass center from the steering axis. All the terms involve complex combinations of bicycle design parameters and sometimes the speed. The limitations of the benchmark bicycle are considered and extensions to the treatments of tires, frames and riders,[75] and their implications, are included. Optimal rider controls for stabilization and path-following control are also discussed.[7]

It is possible to calculate eigenvalues, one for each of the four state variables (lean angle, lean rate, steer angle, and steer rate), from the linearized equations in order to analyze the normal modes and self-stability of a particular bike design. In the plot to the right, eigenvalues of one particular bicycle are calculated for forward speeds of 0–10 m/s (22 mph). When the real parts of all eigenvalues (shown in dark blue) are negative, the bike is self-stable. When the imaginary parts of any eigenvalues (shown in cyan) are non-zero, the bike exhibits oscillation. The eigenvalues are point symmetric about the origin and so any bike design with a self-stable region in forward speeds will not be self-stable going backwards at the same speed.[2]

There are three forward speeds that can be identified in the plot to the right at which the motion of the bike changes qualitatively:[2]

Between these last two speeds, if they both exist, is a range of forward speeds at which the particular bike design is self-stable. In the case of the bike whose eigenvalues are shown here, the self-stable range is 5.3–8.0 m/s (12–18 mph). The fourth eigenvalue, which is usually stable (very negative), represents the castoring behavior of the front wheel, as it tends to turn towards the direction in which the bike is traveling. Note that this idealized model does not exhibit the wobble or shimmy and rear wobble instabilities described above. They are seen in models that incorporate tire interaction with the ground or other degrees of freedom.[9]

Experimentation with real bikes has so far confirmed the weave mode predicted by the eigenvalues. It was found that tire slip and frame flex are not important for the lateral dynamics of the bicycle in the speed range up to 6 m/s.[76]

Bikes, as complex mechanisms, have a variety of modes: fundamental ways that they can move. These modes can be stable or unstable, depending on the bike parameters and its forward speed. In this context, "stable" means that an uncontrolled bike will continue rolling forward without falling over as long as forward speed is maintained. Conversely, "unstable" means that an uncontrolled bike will eventually fall over, even if forward speed is maintained. The modes can be differentiated by the speed at which they switch stability and the relative phases of leaning and steering as the bike experiences that mode. Any bike motion consists of a combination of various amounts of the possible modes, and there are three main modes that a bike can experience: capsize, weave, and wobble.[2] A lesser known mode is rear wobble, and it is usually stable.[9]

Capsize is falling over without oscillation. During capsize, an uncontrolled front wheel usually steers in the direction of lean, but never enough to stop the increasing lean, until a very high lean angle is reached, at which point the steering may turn in the opposite direction. A capsize can happen very slowly if the bike is moving forward rapidly. Because the capsize instability is so slow, on the order of seconds, it is easy for the rider to control, and is actually used by the rider to initiate the lean necessary for a turn.[9] For most bikes, depending on geometry and mass distribution, capsize is stable at low speeds, and becomes less stable as speed increases until it is no longer stable. However, on many bikes, tire interaction with the pavement is sufficient to prevent capsize from becoming unstable at high speeds.[9][11]

Weave is a slow (0&–4&–Hz) oscillation between leaning left and steering right, and vice versa. The entire bike is affected with significant changes in steering angle, lean angle (roll), and heading angle (yaw). The steering is 180° out of phase with the heading and 90° out of phase with the leaning.[9] This AVI movie shows weave.

For most bikes, depending on geometry and mass distribution, weave is unstable at low speeds, and becomes less pronounced as speed increases until it is no longer unstable. While the amplitude may decrease, the frequency actually increases with speed.[15]

Wobble, shimmy, tank-slapper, speed wobble, and death wobble are all words and phrases used to describe a rapid (4–10 Hz) oscillation of primarily just the front end (front wheel, fork, and handlebars). Also involved is the yawing of the rear frame which may contribute to the wobble when too flexible.[77] This instability occurs mostly at high speed and is similar to that experienced by shopping cart wheels, airplane landing gear, and automobile front wheels.[9][11] While wobble or shimmy can be easily remedied by adjusting speed, position, or grip on the handlebar, it can be fatal if left uncontrolled.[78]

Wobble or shimmy begins when some otherwise minor irregularity, such as fork asymmetry,[79] accelerates the wheel to one side. The restoring force is applied in phase with the progress of the irregularity, and the wheel turns to the other side where the process is repeated. If there is insufficient damping in the steering the oscillation will increase until system failure occurs. The oscillation frequency can be changed by changing the forward speed, making the bike stiffer or lighter, or increasing the stiffness of the steering, of which the rider is a main component.[16][28]

The term rear wobble is used to describe a mode of oscillation in which lean angle (roll) and heading angle (yaw) are almost in phase and both 180° out of phase with steer angle. The rate of this oscillation is moderate with a maximum of about 6.5 Hz. Rear wobble is heavily damped and falls off quickly as bike speed increases.[9]

The effect that the design parameters of a bike have on these modes can be investigated by examining the eigenvalues of the linearized equations of motion.[70] For more details on the equations of motion and eigenvalues, see the section on the equations of motion above. Some general conclusions that have been drawn are described here.

The lateral and torsional stiffness of the rear frame and the wheel spindle affects wobble-mode damping substantially. Long wheelbase and trail and a flat steering-head angle have been found to increase weave-mode damping. Lateral distortion can be countered by locating the front fork torsional axis as low as possible.

Cornering weave tendencies are amplified by degraded damping of the rear suspension. Cornering, camber stiffnesses and relaxation length of the rear tire make the largest contribution to weave damping. The same parameters of the front tire have a lesser effect. Rear loading also amplifies cornering weave tendencies. Rear load assemblies with appropriate stiffness and damping, however, were successful in damping out weave and wobble oscillations.

One study has shown theoretically that, while a bike leaned in a turn, road undulations can excite the weave mode at high speed or the wobble mode at low speed if either of their frequencies match the vehicle speed and other parameters. Excitation of the wobble mode can be mitigated by an effective steering damper and excitation of the weave mode is worse for light riders than for heavy riders.[14]

Riding on a treadmill is theoretically identical to riding on stationary pavement, and physical testing has confirmed this.[80] Treadmills have been developed specifically for indoor bicycle training.[81][82] Riding on rollers is still under investigation.[83][84][85]

Although bicycles and motorcycles can appear to be simple mechanisms with only four major moving parts (frame, fork, and two wheels), these parts are arranged in a way that makes them complicated to analyze.[28] While it is an observable fact that bikes can be ridden even when the gyroscopic effects of their wheels are canceled out,[5][6] the hypothesis that the gyroscopic effects of the wheels are what keep a bike upright is common in print and online.[5][48]

Examples in print:

Bikes may experience a variety of longitudinal forces and motions. On most bikes, when the front wheel is turned to one side or the other, the entire rear frame pitches forward slightly, depending on the steering axis angle and the amount of trail.[9][47] On bikes with suspensions, either front, rear, or both, trim is used to describe the geometric configuration of the bike, especially in response to forces of braking, accelerating, turning, drive train, and aerodynamic drag.[9]

The load borne by the two wheels varies not only with center of mass location, which in turn varies with the number of passengers, the amount of luggage, and the location of passengers and luggage, but also with acceleration and deceleration. This phenomenon is known as load transfer[9] or weight transfer,[45][71] depending on the author, and provides challenges and opportunities to both riders and designers. For example, motorcycle racers can use it to increase the friction available to the front tire when cornering, and attempts to reduce front suspension compression during heavy braking has spawned several motorcycle fork designs.

The net aerodynamic drag forces may be considered to act at a single point, called the center of pressure.[45] At high speeds, this will create a net moment about the rear driving wheel and result in a net transfer of load from the front wheel to the rear wheel.[45] Also, depending on the shape of the bike and the shape of any fairing that might be installed, aerodynamic lift may be present that either increases or further reduces the load on the front wheel.[45]

Though longitudinally stable when stationary, a bike may become longitudinally unstable under sufficient acceleration or deceleration, and Euler's second law can be used to analyze the ground reaction forces generated.[86] For example, the normal (vertical) ground reaction forces at the wheels for a bike with a wheelbase 



L


{\displaystyle L}

 and a center of mass at height 



h


{\displaystyle h}

 and at a distance 



b


{\displaystyle b}

 in front of the rear wheel hub, and for simplicity, with both wheels locked, can be expressed as:[9]

The frictional (horizontal) forces are simply

where 



μ


{\displaystyle \mu }

 is the coefficient of friction, 



m


{\displaystyle m}

 is the total mass of the bike and rider, and 



g


{\displaystyle g}

 is the acceleration of gravity. Therefore, if

which occurs if the center of mass is anywhere above or in front of a line extending back from the front wheel contact patch and inclined at the angle

above the horizontal,[45] then the normal force of the rear wheel will be zero (at which point the equation no longer applies) and the bike will begin to flip or loop forward over the front wheel.

On the other hand, if the center of mass height is behind or below the line, such as on most tandem bicycles or long-wheel-base recumbent bicycles, as well as cars, it is less likely that the front wheel can generate enough braking force to flip the bike. This means they can decelerate up to nearly the limit of adhesion of the tires to the road, which could reach 0.8 g if the coefficient of friction is 0.8, which is 40% more than an upright bicycle under even the best conditions. Bicycling Science author David Gordon Wilson points out that this puts upright bicyclists at particular risk of causing a rear-end collision if they tailgate cars.[87]

Similarly, powerful motorcycles can generate enough torque at the rear wheel to lift the front wheel off the ground in a maneuver called a wheelie. A line similar to the one described above to analyze braking performance can be drawn from the rear wheel contact patch to predict if a wheelie is possible given the available friction, the center of mass location, and sufficient power.[45] This can also happen on bicycles, although there is much less power available, if the center of mass is back or up far enough or the rider lurches back when applying power to the pedals.[88]

Of course, the angle of the terrain can influence all of the calculations above. All else remaining equal, the risk of pitching over the front end is reduced when riding up hill and increased when riding down hill. The possibility of performing a wheelie increases when riding up hill,[88] and is a major factor in motorcycle hillclimbing competitions.

When braking, the rider in motion is seeking to change the speed of the combined mass m of rider plus bike. This is a negative acceleration a in the line of travel. F=ma, the acceleration a causes an inertial forward force F on mass m.
The braking a is from an initial speed u to a final speed v, over a length of time t. The equation u - v=at implies that the greater the acceleration the shorter the time needed to change speed. The stopping distance s is also shortest when acceleration a is at the highest possible value compatible with road conditions: the equation s=ut + 1/2 at2 makes s low when a is high and t is low.

How much braking force to apply to each wheel depends both on ground conditions and on the balance of weight on the wheels at each instant in time. The total braking force cannot exceed the gravity force on the rider and bike times the coefficient of friction μ of the tire on the ground. mgμ >= Ff + Fr. A skid occurs if the ratio of either Ff over Nf or Fr over Nr is greater than μ, with a rear wheel skid having less of a negative impact on lateral stability.


When braking, the inertial force ma in the line of travel, not being co-linear with f, tends to rotate m about f. This tendency to rotate, an overturning moment, is resisted by a moment from mg. 
Taking moments about the front wheel contact point at an instance in time:

Other factors:

Values for μ vary greatly depending on a number of factors:

Most of the braking force of standard upright bikes comes from the front wheel. As the analysis above shows, if the brakes themselves are strong enough, the rear wheel is easy to skid, while the front wheel often can generate enough stopping force to flip the rider and bike over the front wheel. This is called a stoppie if the rear wheel is lifted but the bike does not flip, or an endo (abbreviated form of end-over-end) if the bike flips. On long or low bikes, however, such as cruiser motorcycles[90] and recumbent bicycles, the front tire will skid instead, possibly causing a loss of balance. Assuming no loss of balance, it is possible to calculate optimum braking performance depending on the bike's geometry, the location of center of gravity of bike and rider, and the maximum coefficient of friction.[91]

In the case of a front suspension, especially telescoping fork tubes, the increase in downward force on the front wheel during braking may cause the suspension to compress and the front end to lower. This is known as brake diving. A riding technique that takes advantage of how braking increases the downward force on the front wheel is known as trail braking.

The limiting factors on the maximum deceleration in front wheel braking are:

For an upright bicycle on dry asphalt with excellent brakes, pitching will probably be the limiting factor. The combined center of mass of a typical upright bicycle and rider will be about 60 cm (24 in) back from the front wheel contact patch and 120 cm (47 in) above, allowing a maximum deceleration of 0.5 g (5 m/s2 or 16 ft/s2).[28] If the rider modulates the brakes properly, however, pitching can be avoided. If the rider moves his weight back and down, even larger decelerations are possible.

The rear brake of an upright bicycle can only produce about 0.25 g (≈2.5 m/s2) deceleration at best,[87] because of the decrease in normal force at the rear wheel as described above. All such bikes with only rear braking are subject to this limitation: for example, bikes with only a coaster brake, and fixed-gear bikes with no other braking mechanism. There are, however, situations that may warrant rear wheel braking[93]

Expert opinion varies from "use both levers equally at first"[95] to "the fastest that you can stop any bike of normal wheelbase is to apply the front brake so hard that the rear wheel is just about to lift off the ground",[93] depending on road conditions, rider skill level, and desired fraction of maximum possible deceleration.

The SureStop System uses a sliding mechanism to enable the front brakes to be actuated by the friction applied to the back brake shoes by the rotation of the rear wheel. This is designed to optimise the braking friction to that of the road conditions so as to mitigate the risk of going over the handlebars.

Bikes may have only front, only rear, full suspension or no suspension that operate primarily in the central plane of symmetry; though with some consideration given to lateral compliance.[45] The goals of a bike suspension are to reduce vibration experienced by the rider, maintain wheel contact with the ground, reduce the loss of momentum when riding over an object, reduce impact forces caused by jumps or drops and maintain vehicle trim.[9] The primary suspension parameters are stiffness, damping, sprung and unsprung mass, and tire characteristics.[45]

The study of vibrations in bikes includes its causes, such as engine balance,[96] wheel balance, ground surface, and aerodynamics; its transmission and absorption; and its effects on the bike, the rider, and safety.[97] An important factor in any vibration analysis is a comparison of the natural frequencies of the system with the possible driving frequencies of the vibration sources.[98] A close match means mechanical resonance that can result in large amplitudes. A challenge in vibration damping is to create compliance in certain directions (vertically) without sacrificing frame rigidity needed for power transmission and handling (torsionally).[99] Another issue with vibration for the bike is the possibility of failure due to material fatigue[100] Effects of vibration on riders include discomfort, loss of efficiency, Hand-Arm Vibration Syndrome, a secondary form Raynaud's disease, and whole body vibration. Vibrating instruments may be inaccurate or difficult to read.[100]

The primary cause of vibrations in a properly functioning bicycle is the surface over which it rolls. In addition to pneumatic tires and traditional bicycle suspensions, a variety of techniques have been developed to damp vibrations before they reach the rider. These include materials, such as carbon fiber, either in the whole frame or just key components such as the front fork, seatpost, or handlebars; tube shapes, such as curved seat stays;,[101] gel handlebar grips and saddles and special inserts, such as Zertz by Specialized,[102][103] and Buzzkills by Bontrager.

In addition to the road surface, vibrations in a motorcycle can be caused by the engine and wheels, if unbalanced. Manufacturers employ a variety of technologies to reduce or damp these vibrations, such as engine balance shafts, rubber engine mounts,[104] and tire weights.[105] The problems that vibration causes have also spawned an industry of after-market parts and systems designed to reduce it. Add-ons include handlebar weights,[106] isolated foot pegs, and engine counterweights. At high speeds, motorcycles and their riders may also experience aerodynamic flutter or buffeting.[107] This can be abated by changing the air flow over key parts, such as the windshield.[108]

A variety of experiments verify or disprove various hypotheses about bike dynamics.

Videos:

Research centers:

Conferences:Scouting America is the largest scouting organization and one of the largest youth organizations in the United States, with over 1 million youth, including nearly 200,000 female participants.[2] Founded as the Boy Scouts of America in 1910, about 130 million Americans have participated in its programs, which are served by 465,000 adult volunteers.[3] The organization became a founding member of the World Organization of the Scout Movement in 1922.

The stated mission of Scouting America is to "prepare young people to make ethical and moral choices over their lifetimes by instilling in them the values of the Scout Oath and Law." Youth are trained in responsible citizenship, character development, and self-reliance through participation in a wide range of outdoor activities, educational programs, and, at older age levels, career-oriented programs in partnership with community organizations. For younger members, the Scout method is part of the program to instill typical Scouting values such as trustworthiness, good citizenship, and outdoors skills, through a variety of activities such as camping, aquatics, and hiking. To further these outdoor activities, Scouting America owns four high-adventure bases: Northern Tier (Minnesota, Manitoba, and Ontario), Philmont Scout Ranch (New Mexico), Sea Base (Florida Keys, US Virgin Islands, and Bahamas), and Summit Bechtel Reserve (West Virginia), as well as nearly 100 camps and reservations dedicated to scouts.[4]

The main Scouting divisions are Cub Scouts for ages 5 to 11 years, Scouts BSA for ages 10 to 18, Venturing for ages 14 through 21, and Sea Scouts for ages 14 through 21. Scouting America operates by chartering local organizations, such as churches, clubs, civic associations, or educational organizations, to implement the Scouting program for youth within their communities. Units are led by volunteers appointed by the chartering organization, who are supported by local councils using both paid professional Scouters and volunteers. Additionally, Learning for Life is an affiliate that provides in-school and career education.[5]

In 2019, the Boy Scouts of America renamed its flagship program, Boy Scouts, to Scouts BSA to reflect its policy change allowing girls to join separate, gender-specific troops.[6] Accordingly, on February 8, 2025, its 115th anniversary, the BSA changed its name to Scouting America. The Scout Oath, Law and program remain unchanged.[7]

The progressive movement in the United States was at its height during the early 20th century.[8] With the migration of families from farms to cities, there were concerns among some people that young men were no longer learning patriotism, self-reliance, and individualism. Several groups attempted to fill this void. The YMCA was an early promoter of reforms for young men with a focus on social welfare and programs of mental, physical, social and religious development.[9]: 72–82  Others, included the Woodcraft Indians started by Ernest Thompson Seton in 1902 in Cos Cob, Connecticut, and the Sons of Daniel Boone founded by Daniel Carter Beard in 1905 in Cincinnati, Ohio.[10], two notable independent scouting predecessors of Scouting America within the United States.

In 1907, Robert Baden-Powell founded the Scouting movement in England using elements of Seton's works among other influences.[11] In 1909, Chicago publisher W. D. Boyce was visiting London, where he encountered a boy who came to be known as the Unknown Scout.[12] Boyce was lost on a foggy street when an unknown Scout came to his aid, guiding him to his destination. The boy then refused Boyce's tip, explaining that he was a Boy Scout and was merely doing his daily good turn. Interested in the Boy Scouts, Boyce met with staff at the Boy Scouts Headquarters and, by some accounts, Baden-Powell. Upon his return to the US, Boyce was inspired by his experience and incorporated the Boy Scouts of America on February 8, 1910.[13] Edgar M. Robinson and Lee F. Hanmer became interested in the nascent BSA and convinced Boyce to turn the program over to the YMCA for development in April 1910. Robinson enlisted Seton, Beard, Charles Eastman, and other prominent leaders in the early youth movements. Former president Theodore Roosevelt, who had long complained of the decline in American manhood, became an ardent supporter.[14] In January 1911, Robinson turned the movement over to James E. West who became the first Chief Scout Executive and Scouting began to expand in the US[9]: 148  Among other programs in the US, the Woodcraft Indians and Sons of Daniel Boone, eventually merged with the BSA.[15]: 52 

Scouting America's stated purpose at its incorporation in 1910 was "to teach [boys] patriotism, courage, self-reliance, and kindred values."[16]: 7  Later, in 1937, Deputy Chief Scout Executive George J. Fisher expressed the BSA's mission: "Each generation as it comes to maturity has no more important duty than that of teaching high ideals and proper behavior to the generation which follows."[17] The current mission statement of Scouting America is "to prepare young people to make ethical and moral choices over their lifetimes by instilling in them the values of the Scout Oath and Law."[18][19]

At its peak, Scouting America had an active membership of over 4 million youth in 1973.[20] Today, popularity in outdoor events has waned and membership has dropped. However, Scouting America remains the largest scouting organization and one of the largest youth organizations in the United States, with about 1 million youth participants and over 400,000 adult volunteers as of 2024[update].[21]

The purposes of the corporation are to promote, through organization, and cooperation with other agencies, the ability of boys to do things for themselves and others, to train them in scoutcraft, and to teach them patriotism, courage, self-reliance, and kindred virtues, using the methods that were in common use by boy scouts on June 15, 1916.

Scouting America holds one of the comparatively rare congressional charters under Title 36 of the United States Code.[22][23] On behalf of Scouting America, Paul Sleman, Colin H. Livingstone, Ernest S. Martin, and James E. West successfully lobbied Congress for a federal charter, which President Woodrow Wilson signed on June 15, 1916. One of the principal reasons for seeking a congressional charter was to deal with competition from other Scout organizations including the United States Boy Scouts and the Lone Scouts of America.[24] The 1916 statute of incorporation established this institution among a small number of similarly chartered patriotic and national organizations,[25] such as the Girl Scouts, Civil Air Patrol, the American Legion, the Red Cross, Little League Baseball, and the National Academy of Sciences. The federal incorporation was originally construed primarily as an honor; however, it does grant the chartered organization some special privileges and rights, including freedom from antitrust and monopoly regulation and complete control over the organization's symbols and insignia, [26] though it neither implies nor accords Congress any special control over Scouting America, which remains free to function independently.[27]

Scouting America uses four primary programs to achieve its aims in Scouting:

There are about 100,000 physically or mentally disabled Scouts throughout the United States. Anyone certified as disabled "may enroll in Scouting and remain in its program beyond the regulation age limits. This provision allows all members to advance in Scouting as far as they wish."[31]

Scouting America offers several other programs and subprograms beyond regular membership:

Unlike Learning for Life, membership in the regular Scouting America programs had been more restricted and controversial. Until the late 2010s, Cub Scouting or the program then-named Boy Scouting was open to boys only, but girls were permitted to join the Venturing, Sea Scouting, and Explorers programs in 1970. Women could also serve as adult volunteers in all programs in approximately the same time frame. On October 11, 2017, Scouting America announced that girls would be allowed to become Cub Scouts, starting in 2018, and be in the Scouts BSA program, starting on February 1, 2019.[39][40][41][42][43][44]

Scouting America's religious requirements of its members have been controversial and inconsistent.  Many volunteers within the organization believe that atheists and agnostics are welcome, and because of this, in many troops they are. However, in 2018, the Boy Scouts of America National Executive Board "reaffirm[ed] its unequivocal commitment to the Declaration of Religious Principle as a fundamental component of the mission of the Boy Scouts of America".[45] At the same meeting, it also stated that "[t]he recognition of God as the ruling and leading power in the universe and the grateful acknowledgement of His favors and blessings are necessary to the best type of citizenship and are wholesome precepts in the education of the growing members"[45]. This position is inconsistent with the fact that the BSA has had Buddhist troops since 1920, and Buddhism is a nontheistic religion which does not assert belief in a creator God.[46] The BSA also signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Unitarian Universalist Association in 2016 which specifically gives ultimate authority over a participant's spiritual welfare to the individual Unitarian Universalist congregation. The MOU also specifically includes within Unitarian Universalist chartered troops humanism as an acceptable form of spirituality as well as Earth-centered religions.[47]

In 2000, the Supreme Court ruled in Boy Scouts of America v. Dale that Boy Scouts and all similar, private voluntary organizations have the constitutionally protected right under the First Amendment of freedom of association to set membership standards.[48] In 2004, the BSA adopted a new policy statement, including a "Youth Leadership" policy that disallowed members to continue in leadership positions in the event they were to hold themselves out as "open and avowed homosexuals.[49]

At the Scouts annual meeting in April 2012, a leader from the Northeast presented a resolution that "would allow individual units to accept gays as adult leaders".[50][51] However, in July 2012, at the culmination of a review started in 2010, an 11-person committee convened by the BSA reached a "unanimous consensus" recommending retaining the current policy.[52][53] Intel,[54] UPS,[55] and Merck[56][57] cut financial ties with Scouting America over the policy decision. Within the BSA National Executive Board, members James Turley, CEO of Ernst & Young, and Randall Stephenson, CEO of AT&T and who was then "on track to become president of the Scout's national board in 2014"[58] and later was, publicly opposed the policy and stated their intention "to work from within the BSA Board to actively encourage dialogue and sustainable progress" in changing the policy.[59] On January 28, 2013, the BSA announced it was considering rescinding the ban on homosexuals, allowing chartered organizations to determine local policy.[60]

On May 23, 2013, over 60% of the 1,400-member BSA National Council voted to remove the restriction denying membership to youth on the basis of sexual orientation while emphasizing that any sexual conduct, whether heterosexual or homosexual, is not allowed. The resolution went into effect on January 1, 2014,[61][62] but Scout leaders who were "open and avowed homosexuals" were still prohibited. The policy specifically states that BSA does not inquire into a person's sexuality.[63] Gay rights groups hailed the decision, but vowed to press on until all gay members were accepted. Some churches and conservative members threatened to quit the Boy Scouts in response.[64] On June 12, 2013, the Southern Baptist Convention passed non-binding resolutions urging the BSA not to change their policy.[65][66] In September 2013, a new scouting group called Trail Life USA was created, in support of what founders call "traditional, Christian" scouting.[67][68][69] Subsequently, some Christian denomination congregations replaced their Boy Scouts of America troops with those of Trail Life USA.[70]

In May 2015, Boy Scouts of America President Robert Gates said it was time to end the ban on gay leaders. Gates said it "cannot be sustained" any longer. On July 10, 2015, the Boy Scouts of America Executive Committee agreed, and referred the matter to the National Executive Board.[71] On July 27, 2015, the Boy Scouts of America National Executive Board voted to lift the organization's blanket ban on openly gay leaders and employees. Local chartering organizations are still permitted to set their own standards based on religious principle for selecting the adult volunteers for their unit.[72]

On January 30, 2017, the Boy Scouts of America announced that transgender children who identify as boys would be allowed to enroll in boys-only programs, effective immediately. Previously, the sex listed on an applicant's birth certificate determined eligibility for these programs; going forward, the decision would be based on the gender listed on the application.[73] Joe Maldonado became the first openly transgender child identifying as a boy to join the Scouts on February 7, 2017.[74] In 2016, he was rejected from the Boy Scouts for being transgender, but the policy was changed after his story became nationally known.[75]

On October 11, 2017, the Boy Scouts of America announced that girls would be welcomed into Cub Scouts beginning in late 2018, with an early adopter program beginning on January 15, 2018, in councils that wished to participate early. The announcement included the statement that girls in Cub Scouting will simply be called "Cub Scouts". The flagship program of Boy Scouts of America, previously known as "Boy Scouting", became known as Scouts BSA on February 1, 2019, when the program opened to girls. Members of Scouts BSA are known as "Scouts".[76] On November 6, 2018, the GSUSA filed a federal trademark lawsuit[77] seeking to block the BSA from rebranding itself simply as "Scouts";[78] this is not the first time the two organizations have legally contested the use of the term scout.[79]

On May 7, 2024, the BSA announced that it would change its name to Scouting America. The name change officially went into effect on February 8, 2025, the 115th anniversary of the organization. The Scout Oath, Law and program remain unchanged. The uniforms also remain the same but are embroidered with the new name.[80][81][82]  The change does not affect the name of their flagship program, "Scouts BSA" which was renamed from "Boy Scouts" in 2019.

"On my honor, I will do my best, to do my duty, to God and my country, and to obey the Scout Law, to help other people at all times, to keep myself physically strong, mentally awake, and morally straight." -Scout Oath

"A Scout is trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave, clean, and reverent." -Scout Law

The objectives of Scouting America are referred to as the Aims and Methods of Scouting: Character, Citizenship, Personal Fitness, Leadership.[83] Scouting America pursues these aims through an informal education system called the Scout method, with variations that are designed to be appropriate for the age and maturity of each membership division.[18][84]

Cub Scouts wear a uniform that gives each Scout a level of identity within the den, the pack and the community. The Scouts learn teamwork by meeting and working together in a den of four to ten boys or girls under adult leadership. They learn and apply the ideals codified in the Scout Oath and the Scout Law through an advancement system using age-based ranks earned by completing required and elective adventures. Some advancement is done in the home and is intended to involve the entire family and many Cub Scout activities include family members.[29]

In the Scouts BSA program, Scouts learn to use the ideals spelled out in the Scout Oath, the Scout Law, the Outdoor Code, the Scout motto ("Be prepared"), and the Scout slogan ("Do a good turn daily"). They wear a uniform and work together in patrols of four to ten Scouts with an elected patrol leader, who then appoints an assistant patrol leader. Scouts share responsibilities, apply skills learned at meetings and live together in the outdoors. The advancement system provides opportunities for personal growth and self-reliance.[85] Scouts interact with adult leaders who act as role models and mentors, but they are expected to plan their own activities within the troop and to participate in community service.[85]

Venturers are expected to know and live by the Scout Oath and Law. Before May 2014,[86] members of the Venturing program followed the now discontinued Venturing Oath and Venturing Code.[87] Venturers associate and work directly with adult advisors, but the crew is led by elected youth officers who are given opportunities to learn and apply leadership skills. Venturers plan and participate in interdependent group experiences dependent on cooperation. An emphasis on high adventure provides opportunities for team-building and practical leadership applications. A series of awards provide opportunities for recognition and personal growth.[88] Each award requires the Venturer to teach what they have learned to others, thereby returning the skill and knowledge back to the community and enabling the Venturer to master those skills.[88]

In October 2012, the National Council announced that, as a result of the findings and recommendations of a select committee made up of volunteer Scouters, the Cub Scout and Venturing programs would transition to use of the Scout Oath and Law, and in the case of the Venturers, the Boy Scout three-finger salute and sign as well. The Venturing change occurred in May 2014; and the Cub Scout change in mid-2015.[89]

There are seven ranks that a Scout in the Scouts BSA program may attain (note that Eagle Palms are not considered ranks[90]). To obtain a rank, a Scout must complete the requirements for that rank, as well as have a Scoutmaster Conference and a Board of Review (with the exception of Scout Rank).[91] To obtain a rank you must first acquire the rank previous to it, with the exception of Scout rank in which a Scout can earn at anytime once they have completed the requirements for it. The ranks are in the following order: Scout, Tenderfoot, Second Class, First Class, Star Scout, Life Scout, and Eagle Scout. An increasing number of merit badges, as well as being in troop leadership positions, is required for the latter 3 ranks, plus other requirements. Certain ranks require specific merit badges and leadership positions.[91]

Eagle Scout is the highest rank one can receive in Scouts BSA. Since its introduction in 1911, the Eagle Scout rank has been earned by more than two million youth. Requirements include earning at least 21 merit badges and demonstrating Scout Spirit through the Scout Oath and Law, service, and leadership, all before or by age 18. This includes an extensive service project that the Scout plans, organizes, leads, and manages. Eagle Scouts are presented with a medal and a badge that visibly recognizes the accomplishments of the Scout. Additional recognition can be earned through Eagle Palms, awarded for completing additional tenure, leadership, and merit badge requirements.[92][93]

The National Scout Jamboree is a gathering of Scouts and Venturers from across the US. It is usually held every four years, with some adjustment for special years such as the 2010 National Scout Jamboree that celebrated Scouting America centennial. The first jamboree was held in 1937 at the Washington Monument in Washington, D.C.[94] There were 27,232 Scouts and Leaders present at the first National Jamboree.[95] In 1950, the Boy Scouts of America hosted their second National Jamboree at Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. The event was to commemorate the organization's 40th anniversary.[95] Since then, jamborees have been held in varying locations. From 1981 until 2010, the jamboree was held at Fort A.P. Hill, Virginia. A permanent location owned by Scouting America was sought in 2008 for future jamborees, high adventure programs and training. The Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve near Beckley, West Virginia, is now the permanent site beginning with the 2013 National Scout Jamboree.[96]

Scouting America operates several high-adventure bases at the national level. Each offers a wide range of programs and training; a typical core program may include sailing, wilderness canoeing or wilderness backpacking and camping trips. These bases are administered by the High Adventure Division of the National Council.[97]

The high-adventure bases of Scouting America are Philmont Scout Ranch, Northern Tier National High Adventure Bases, Sea Base, and The Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve.[98]

Scouting America offers a wide variety of mandatory and optional training programs in youth protection, outdoor skills and leadership.

Every adult leader must complete Youth Protection Training. Position-specific training is also required for all direct-contact leaders. Upon completion of basic training, a leader may wear the Trained emblem on his/her Scouting America uniform.[99]

Supplemental skill-specific training is also available to Scouting America volunteers to gain knowledge in outdoors skills including camping, hiking, first aid, Leave No Trace, swim safety, climbing safety, hazardous weather, and other skills.[100]

The highest level of Scouting America training is Wood Badge,[101] focused on helping participants develop leadership skills while participating in an outdoor program over five days. Some councils offer high-adventure training for adults using the Powder Horn program.[102] Leaders can also take the Seabadge advanced leadership and management course.[103]

Scout youth leaders may attend the unit-level Introduction to Leadership Skills for Troops. Local councils offer the advanced National Youth Leadership Training and the National Council offers the National Advanced Youth Leadership Experience conducted at Philmont Training Center. Scouting America also offers the NYLT Leadership Academy which trains youth staff members from across the country for council-level NYLT courses.[104]

Venturers and Sea Scouts may attend the unit-level Introduction to Leadership Skills for Crews or Introduction to Leadership Skills for Ships. Crew officers can attend Crew Officer Orientation, and then a council-provided Kodiak leadership training program.[105]

Order of the Arrow members may attend the National Leadership Seminar, run multiple times each year by each region.[106]

Scouting America operates a National Camping School program which trains people how to run various departments or areas at the Scouts BSA summer camps. Some online training is offered, but most areas require an in-person week-long training program at one of the National Camping Schools.[107][108] After successfully completing a week-long program, a person is entitled to wear the National Camping School patch. The regular-size patch may be worn on the right breast shirt pocket, in the temporary patch spot.[109] National Camping School certification is valid for five years.[110]

COPE, which stands for Challenging Outdoor Personal Experience, is a program that consists of a series of tests of strength, agility, coordination, and problem-solving, individually and within groups.[111]

Scouts see nature as an adventurous place, and it is expected that when they get older the experience from their youth will make them nature lovers. Scouts envisage nature as a heritage.[112] [113]

"On breaking up camp leave two things behind you: 1. Nothing. 2. Your thanks." — Lord Baden-Powell in 1919.
The National Council is the corporate membership of Scouting America and consists of volunteer Scouters who meet annually. The day-to-day operations of the National Council are administered by the Chief Scout Executive and other national professional staff. National Council members include volunteers who are elected national officers and executive board members, regional presidents, the local council representatives, members at large, and honorary members. The national headquarters has been in Irving, Texas since 1979.

Since the founding of Scouting America in 1910, the President of the United States has served as the organization's honorary chair during his term in office, former presidents serve as honorary vice chairs for their lifetimes.[114]

The Scouting America National Executive Board governs the organization. The 2015 National Executive Board consisted of 79 members.[115]

The board is led by the national president, a volunteer elected by the National Council. Board members included regular elected members, regional presidents, and up to five appointed youth members. The Chief Scout Executive is the board secretary and non-voting member. The National Executive Board has a number of standing committees that correspond to the professional staff organization of the National Council.

Present and past members of the National Executive Board include Utah Senator Mitt Romney,[116] Ernst & Young CEO Jim Turley and AT&T CEO Randall Stephenson.[117] Other members included Latter-day Saint Church President Thomas S. Monson.[118]

For administrative purposes, Scouting America is divided into sixteen National Service Territories (NSTs) including international areas for scouts with parents serving outside the US. Each NST encompasses multiple states or portions of states/counties.[119]

Until 2021, Scouting America was divided into four regions for administrative purposes — Central, Southern, Western, Northeast.[120]

The Scouting America program is administered through 248 local councils, with each council covering a geopolitical area that may vary from a single city to an entire state. Councils receive an annual charter from the National Council and are usually incorporated as a charitable organization.[121]

The council level organization is similar to that of the National Council. The council executive board is headed by the council president and is made up of annually elected local community leaders.[122] The board establishes the council program and carries out the resolutions, policies, and activities of the council. Board members serve without pay and some are volunteer Scouters working at the unit level. Youth members may be elected to the council executive board according to the council by-laws.

The Scout executive manages council operations—including finance, property management, advancement and awards, registrations, and Scout Shop sales—with a staff of other professionals and para-professionals. Volunteer commissioners lead the unit service functions of the council, help maintain the standards of Scouting America, and assure a healthy unit program.[123]

Scouting America charters two councils for American Scouts living overseas, largely on military bases in Europe and Asia. The Transatlantic Council, headquartered in Livorno, Italy, serves Scouting America units in much of Europe, and the Far East Council, headquartered in Japan, serves units in the western Pacific areas. The Direct Service branch makes the Scouting movement available to US citizens and their dependents living in countries outside these jurisdictions or in isolated areas. The Aloha Council in Hawaii also serves Scouting America units in the American territories of American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands and in the sovereign countries of the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and Palau.[124]

The Greater New York Councils are unique in that they are divided into five boroughs with each led by a borough Scout executive and each borough then divided into districts.

Councils are divided into districts with leadership provided by the district executive, district chairman, and the district commissioner.[121] Districts are directly responsible for the operation of Scouting units and, except for the district executive, are mostly staffed with volunteers.[122] The voting members of each district consist of volunteer representatives from each chartered organization having at least one Scouting America unit, plus annually elected members-at-large who in turn elect the district chairman. Boroughs and districts are subdivisions of the local council and do not have a separate corporate status.[125]

Scouting America partners with community organizations, such as religious congregations, fraternal groups, service clubs, and other community associations, to provide the Scouting program for the particular neighborhood or community in which the particular organization wishes to reach out to youth and families. The connection with religious congregations stems back to at least 1910, when a Catholic parish church in Saint Paul, Minnesota chartered the first troop in the city.[126][127]

Organizations hold charters issued by Scouting America and are known then as chartered organizations. Each chartered organization provides the meeting place for Scouting America youth, oversees the volunteer leaders, and agrees to follow the basic Scouting America safety policies and values-based program, and the organization is considered the "owner" of its local program, much like a franchise.[128]

Within each chartered organization, there may be one or more "units". A unit is a group of youth and adults who are collectively designated as a Cub Scout pack, Scouts BSA troop, Venturing crew, or Sea Scout ship. Each chartered organization may charter as many units as it wishes, but usually only 3 or 4 (one unit for each program level). Scouting America councils provide the leader training, inter-unit activities, camping programs, volunteer and professional support, and insurance coverage. Units also create their own activities (such as monthly camping trips, outings, or service projects), and most meet weekly at the place of the chartered organization for youth to learn basic skill development and practice leadership in small groups known as dens and patrols.[128]

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was the first partner to sponsor Scouting in the United States. It adopted the program in 1913 as part of its Mutual Improvement Association program for young men,[129] and it was the largest single sponsor of Scouting until it ceased sponsoring Scouting units[130][131] at the end of 2019.[132]

In all Scouting units above the Cub Scout pack (i.e. units serving adolescent Scouts), leadership of the unit comprises both adult leaders (Scouters) and youth leaders (Scouts). In fact, this is a critical component of the program. In order to learn leadership, the youth must actually serve in leadership roles. Adult leaders may be either men or women in all positions.[128]

A properly run Scouts BSA troop is run by the Senior Patrol Leader, who is elected by the troop, and their assistant, who may either be elected or appointed. These and the other youth leaders are advised and supported by the adult leaders. "Scouts are youth-led."[133]

The National Council is incorporated as a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization and is funded from private donations, membership dues, corporate sponsors, and special events with total revenues of $237 million.[134][135]

In addition to donations from individuals, Scouting America receives extensive donations from major corporations. In 2010, their top corporate donors were, in order, Intel, Emerson, Verizon, 3M, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Pfizer, Valero, UPS, U.S. Bank, Eli Lilly, GE, and Monsanto.[136]

Scouting and Boy Scouts are well known throughout American culture and approximately 130 million Americans have participated in Scouting America programs at some time in their lives.[4] The term "Boy Scout" is used to generally describe someone who is earnest and honest, or who helps others cheerfully; it can also be used as a pejorative term for someone deemed to be overly idealistic.[137]

Prominent Americans in diverse walks of life, from filmmaker Steven Spielberg (who helped launch a merit badge in cinematography) to adventurer Steve Fossett to U.S. presidents, were Scouting America members as youths.[138][139] Over two-thirds of all astronauts have had some type of involvement in Scouting,[140] and eleven of the twelve men to walk on the Moon were Scouts, including Eagle Scouts Neil Armstrong and Charlie Duke.[141][142] The pinewood derby—a wood car racing event for Cub Scouts—has been declared "a celebrated rite of spring" and was named part of "America's 100 Best" by Reader's Digest.[143]

President Gerald Ford said, "I can say without hesitation, because of Scouting principles, I know I was a better athlete, I was a better naval officer, I was a better congressman, and I was a better prepared President."[144]

Famed American illustrator Norman Rockwell's works were closely associated with the Boy Scouts of America for much of the 20th century.[145]: 43  Beginning in 1913, Rockwell began illustrating covers of Boys' Life, the magazine for BSA youth. He also drew the organization's annual calendar illustrations between 1925 and 1976.[145]: 89 

In 1969, as a tribute to Rockwell's 75th birthday, officials of Brown & Bigelow and the Boy Scouts of America asked Rockwell to pose in Beyond the Easel for a calendar illustration. As part of the US Bicentennial celebrations in 1976, Rockwell's Scouting paintings toured the nation and were viewed by 280,000 people.[145]: 155  In 2008, a twelve-city US tour of Rockwell's works was scheduled.[146]

Alvin Townley wrote in Legacy of Honor about the large positive impact of Eagle Scouts in America. Townley cited such examples as how Scouts, especially Eagle Scouts, were disproportionately represented among Hurricane Katrina's volunteer relief workers; just as they are disproportionately represented among members of the United States Senate.[16]: 152  Former Governor Rick Perry of Texas is an Eagle Scout who defended BSA policies and restrictions against ACLU criticisms in his book, On My Honor: Why the American Values of the Boy Scouts Are Worth Fighting For.[147]

Mark Mays, CEO of Clear Channel Communications, told a magazine interviewer in May 2008 that, "Particularly in the very impactful ages of youth 11 to 14 years old, when they can really go astray and you're taking the time to spend with them and focus on cultural core values like reverent, trustworthy, loyal, and helpful—all of those different things ... Scouting has a huge positive impact on boys and their lives, and that in turn positively impacts our communities and society as a whole."[148]

Mayor of New York City and business tycoon Michael Bloomberg, said that Scouting America's Scout Law required of all Scouts—a Scout is trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave, clean, and reverent—are "all the American values ... Americans have quaintly simplistic ways and direct ways of phrasing things ... I think it's one of the great strengths of this country."[16]: 116 

Peter Applebome, an editor of The New York Times, wrote in 2003 of his experience as an adult participating with his son in Scouting activities, "I feel lucky to have had this unexpected vehicle to share my son's youth, to shape it, and to be shaped by it as well."[149] He concluded that, although Scouting is viewed by some as old-fashioned, "Scouting's core values ... are wonderful building blocks for a movement and a life. Scouting's genuinely egalitarian goals and instincts are more important now than they've ever been. It's one of the only things that kids do that's genuinely cooperative, not competitive."[149]: 319–320 

At the turn of the 20th century, Halloween had turned into a night of vandalism, with destruction of property and cruelty to animals and people.[150] Around 1912, the BSA, Boys Clubs and other neighborhood organizations came together to encourage a safe celebration that would end the destruction that had become so common on this night.[151]

Scouting America are quite particular about how and when the Scout uniforms and insignia may be used in film and other portrayals; and for that reason, most films and television productions made in the US utilize "ersatz" Scouting organizations. Examples of this include the "Order of the Straight Arrow", portrayed in the King of the Hill cartoon series, and the "Indian Guides" depicted in the 1995 Chevy Chase film, Man of the House. One exception to this policy is the Walt Disney movie Follow Me, Boys! with Fred MacMurray portraying a Scoutmaster of a rural troop. It was released to theaters in 1966 and re-released in 1976. Another is the final scene of The Sopranos television show, where Tony Soprano sits down to dinner in a restaurant. At another table, several Cub Scouts, in full uniform, are seated.

From the inception of the Scouting movement, Scouts have been urged to "Do a Good Turn Daily", the slogan for Scouting America. The first national Good Turn was the promotion of a safe and sane Fourth of July in 1912. During World War I, Every Scout to Save a Soldier was a slogan used to motivate children involved in Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts to help sell War savings stamps.[152] Scouting for Food is an ongoing annual program begun in 1986 that collects food for local food banks.[153]

In 1997, the BSA developed Service to America with a commitment to provide 200 million hours of service by youth members by the end of the year 2000. As part of Service to America, the BSA provided service projects in conjunction with the National Park Service. In October 2003, the Department of the Interior expanded the program with the creation of Take Pride in America, opening service to all Americans.[154] Service to America became Good Turn for America in 2004 and expanded to address the problems of hunger, homelessness, and inadequate housing and poor health in conjunction with the Salvation Army, the American Red Cross, Habitat for Humanity, and other organizations.[155][156]

On February 1, 2019, the Boy Scouts of America renamed its flagship program, Boy Scouts, to Scouts BSA to reflect its policy change, allowing girls to join separate, gender-specific troops. On February 18, 2020, the National BSA filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection and is currently restructuring its financial situation. On November 16, 2020, the National BSA disclosed in their bankruptcy filings that over 92,000 former Scouts had reported sexual abuse by members of the organization. In December 2021, the insurer for the Boy Scouts of America agreed to pay $800 million into the fund for survivors.[157] In 2022, the Boy Scouts of America agreed to pay an additional $2.4 billion into the fund as part of a bankruptcy settlement with payments beginning in September 2023.[158]

Scouting sexual abuse cases are situations where youth involved in Scouting programs have been sexually abused by someone who is also involved in the Scouting program. J.L. Tarr, a US Chief Scout Executive in the 1980s, was quoted in an article regarding sexual assault cases against Scout leaders across all 50 states: "That's been an issue since the Boy Scouts began."[159] Several reports have surfaced over the years regarding incidents of sexual abuse within the Boy Scouts of America, including incidents of repeat offenders.[160][161] There have also been several high-profile court cases that resulted in convictions and settlements involving such incidents.[160][161] On October 19, 2012, the Boy Scouts of America were forced by court order to release over 20,000 pages of documentation on 1200 alleged child sexual abuse cases within the organization from between 1965 and 1985.[162] Legal claims against Scouting America for such matters continue to the present day.[163][164] Following its bankruptcy in February 2020, over 92,000 sexual abuse claims were filed with the bankruptcy court before the November 16, 2020 deadline to receive claims.[165][166]

In the 1980s, Scouting America developed its Youth Protection program to educate youth, leaders, and parents about the problem and to introduce barriers to sexual abuse of children using the Scout program to reach victims. "Two deep" leadership dictates that no adult member can be alone with any youth member (other than their child). Shortly after joining, youth must discuss with their parents a pamphlet on sexual abuse. Prior to joining, adults must take a youth protection training course, which must be renewed every two years. Since 2003, new adult members must pass a criminal background check (adults who were already members had to pass a background check by 2008). The Youth Protection Plan from the organization is linked to in a CDC report on such programs.[167]

In recent decades, membership in Scouting America and income have declined.[168]

In addition, the organization spent millions of dollars to contest and settle lawsuits arising from sexual misconduct by BSA volunteers and employees dating back to the 1960s. From 2015 to 2017, it paid nearly $12 million to the law firm Ogletree Deakins for litigation counsel.[169] In its 2018 annual report, BSA officials said that the organization's future financial situation would depend on the outcome of various litigation and its costs. The annual report said that the BSA may have "to pay damages out of its own funds to the extent the claims are not covered by insurance or if the insurance carriers are unable or unwilling to honor the claims."[170]

Accordingly, the BSA hired a law firm in December 2018 to investigate filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.[171] Such a bankruptcy could stop litigation of at least 140 lawsuits and prevent further lawsuits.[172] In October 2019, the BSA raised membership rates to cover its increased operational expenses, particularly insurance costs.[173]

On February 18, 2020, the organization filed for bankruptcy in the Bankruptcy court of the U.S. District Court for the District of Delaware, listing liabilities of between $100 million and $500 million and assets of $1 billion to $10 billion. The bankruptcy filing came as the organization faced hundreds of sexual abuse lawsuits. As a result of the filing, all civil litigation against the organization was suspended.[155][174][175][176] Local Councils and units remained largely unaffected as they are standalone units.[177] BSA contends that it alone should be financially responsible for any settlements in the sex abuse case lawsuits.[178] Plaintiffs have complained that BSA is hiding its assets through its affiliates.[179][180] Critics of the filing derisively described the organization and its move as "bankrupt, but not because it's broke."[181]

Due to reports surfacing in the 1970s and 1980s regarding a high level of bullying in the Boy Scouts, efforts were made to develop a no-tolerance bullying policy within the Boy Scouts of America.[182] In the 1990s, the Boy Scouts acknowledged that the organization had a problem with bullying, in particular, due to a "boys will be boys" attitude within Scouting before the 1970s, when adult leaders tended to overlook younger or weaker Scouts who were "picked on" by older boys, such adult leaders feeling that bullying "toughened someone up", labeling boys as "snitches" and "tattletales" should bullying be reported to the adult leadership.[183]

One of the more widely published accounts of Boy Scout bullying occurred in July 1987 when a Boy Scout at the Goshen Scout Reservation was severely beaten in his sleep by several other Scouts. The incident resulted in the Goshen staff changing the layout of its campsites, to prevent having sites in extremely isolated areas, as well as assigning camp staff members to each visiting troop as "advisors" and also to watch for fights or other trouble resulting from conflicts developing at the various campsites.[184]

In the 21st century, the Boy Scouts have adopted a "Bullying Awareness Program" which trains adults to recognize the signs of bullying, especially in isolated environments such as extended campouts in the wilderness or at summer camp. Parents are also advised on what to do and whom to contact should a Scout state other Scouts are bullying them. Dealing with the bullies themselves is also addressed, in particular, those bullies who "game the system", pretending to be compassionate and apologetic for bullying victims when adults confront them, only to return to such behaviors when the adults are no longer present.[185]


In 2018, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—the largest charter organization supporting BSA—cut ties with the BSA, substantially contributing to a net loss of nearly a million scouts and leaders. The decision was made partly in response to BSA membership policy changes, such as allowing girls, openly gay, and transgender people to participate in the organization. However, a joint statement released by the First Presidency of the LDS Church on May 8, 2018, reflects the LDS Church's official stance on the departure and states, in the last paragraph "While the Church will no longer be a chartered partner of BSA or sponsor Scouting units after December 31, 2019, it continues to support the goals and values reflected in the Scout Oath and Scout Law and expresses its profound desire for Scouting's continuing and growing success in the years ahead."[186][187]
During the weekend of February 8th, 2025, the organization's 115th anniversary, sites across the U.S. were illuminated in red, white and blue, including Niagara Falls, the Empire State Building, and the Pennsylvania State Capitol.[190]When the predecessor of international fast food restaurant chain Burger King (BK) first opened in 1953, its menu predominantly consisted of hamburgers, French fries, soft drinks, milkshakes, and desserts. After being acquired by its Miami, Florida franchisees and renamed in 1954, BK began expanding its menu by adding the Whopper sandwich in 1957, and has since added non-beef items such as chicken, fish, and vegetarian offerings, including salads and meatless sandwiches. Other additions include a breakfast menu and beverages such as Icees, juices, and bottled waters. As the company expanded both inside and outside the United States, it introduced localized versions of its products that conform to regional tastes and cultural or religious beliefs. To generate additional sales, BK occasionally introduces limited-time offers of special versions of its products, or brings out completely new products intended for either long- or short-term sales. Not all of these products and services have been successful; in 1992, Burger King introduced limited table service featuring special dinner platters, but this concept failed to generate interest and was discontinued.

The company introduced the first iteration of its breakfast menu, along with the company's "Specialty Sandwich" product line, in a 1978 menu expansion. The products were some of the first designed by a fast food restaurant chain that were intended to capture the adult market, members of which would be willing to spend more on a higher-quality product. The expanded Burger King menu was part of a plan by then-company president Donald N. Smith to reach the broadest possible demographic market to better compete with McDonald's, and to fend off then newcomer Wendy's, who had a growing market share. The plan was successful: the company's sales increased by 15 percent. Despite another menu expansion in 1985, the company's market gains diminished due to neglect of the brand at the hands of then-parent Pillsbury and its successors, Grand Metropolitan and Diageo. When the company was sold to a group led by TPG Capital in 2004, the trend of targeting an expanded audience was renewed under a plan by its then-CEO Brad Blum. During Blum's tenure, the company added several products that featured higher-quality ingredients and other menu fare that again attempted to appeal to the adult palate and demographic. As in the past, not all of these products met corporate sales expectations, or in the case of several of its larger offerings, resulted in negative publicity due to nutritional concerns. With the purchase of the company in 2010 by 3G Capital, the company again began another revamp of its product line by phasing out some products, introducing new ones and redesigning others including its flagship Whopper. 

Like its menu, the equipment the company cooks its hamburgers with, has also evolved as the company grew. The burgers have always been broiled mechanically; the original unit, called an Insta-Broiler, was one of two pieces of equipment the founders of Insta-Burger King purchased before opening their new restaurant. The Insta-Broiler worked by cooking 12 burger patties in a wire basket, allowing the patties to be cooked from both sides simultaneously. With the acquisition of the chain by its Miami franchisees came an improved unit dubbed a "Flame Broiler". Designed by the new owners, it featured stationary burners that cooked the meat on a moving chain. The unit broke down less often, while maintaining a similar cooking rate. The cooking format remained for the next 40 years until Burger King developed a new, variable speed broiler that could handle multiple items with different cooking rates and times. These new units began testing in 1999 and eventually evolved into the two models the company deployed system-wide in 2008–2009. Accompanying these new broilers was new food-holding equipment and a computer-based product monitoring system for its cooked products. The new system allows for more concise tracking of product quality, while giving its users a method to streamline costs by more precisely projecting sales and product usage.

When the predecessor to the modern Burger King, Insta-Burger King, opened in 1953 in Jacksonville, Florida,[1] the company's menu consisted predominantly of hamburgers, French fries, soft drinks, and desserts. Insta-Burger King was acquired in 1954 by two of its franchisees, James McLamore and David Edgerton, who renamed it Burger King. Under its new ownership, the company continued to develop its core menu, cooking techniques, and equipment. In 1957 McLamore and Edgerton created BK's signature item, the Whopper, as a way to differentiate BK from other burger outlets at the time. The Whopper is a 4 oz (110 g) hamburger with lettuce, tomato, mayonnaise, pickle, and ketchup, that was priced at 29¢. The sandwich was designed to give the customer a larger product with better value than competitors, who were selling burgers with an average price of 15¢.[2][3] As Burger King's flagship product, the Whopper has been expanded beyond the original sandwich into a line of sandwiches all made with the same ingredients. The Whopper sandwich has undergone several modifications in its recipe over the years, with a change from a plain bun to a sesame seed roll in the early 1970s and a change in patty size in the mid-1980s being two of the most notable.[4] Since its inception, the Whopper has become synonymous with Burger King and become the focus of much of its advertising.[5] The company has even named its kiosk-style restaurants "Whopper Bars".[6]

In 1978, Donald N. Smith was hired from McDonald's to help restructure the corporate operations of Burger King to better compete against his former company as well as the then up-and-coming chain, Wendy's. As part of an operational overhaul he dubbed "Operation Phoenix",[notes 1] one of his first changes to the company's menu was to add the Burger King specialty sandwich line in 1979. This line—with many non-hamburger sandwiches, including chicken and fish—significantly expanded the breadth of the BK menu. It was one of the first attempts by a major fast food chain to target a specific demographic, in this case adults aged between 18 and 34 years, members of which were presumably willing to spend more on a higher quality product.[notes 2] The new products were successful, and the company's sales increased by 15 percent.[7] While most of the line has since been discontinued, the company's Original Chicken Sandwich is still offered in all of its global markets, and the ham and cheese sandwich is a regional offering.[8]

BK Chicken Tenders made their debut in a menu revision and expansion in 1985 to address the absence of a chicken-based finger product akin to McDonald's Chicken McNuggets. The product had to be temporarily withdrawn because of limited availability of chicken meat; it was re-introduced about six months later.[9] Originally made with sliced fillets of chicken, the product was changed to a formed chopped-chicken product several years later.[10] In 1987, BK rolled out the Burger Bundles, a pack of six mini burger sliders, similar to White Castle was brought back later as the "Burger Buddy".[11] Fish Tenders were introduced to complement Chicken Tenders during a menu expansion in 1989. The new fish product, sold in the same style of container as the Chicken Tenders, was an order of fish sticks with Tartar sauce for dipping. Portion sizes were similar to those of the Chicken Tenders. Fish Tenders were discontinued in 1990.[notes 3]

The company introduced its first broiled chicken sandwich, the BK Broiler, in 1990. The sandwich included a dill-ranch mayonnaise and was served on an oat-bran roll.[12][13] In 1998, BK reformulated the BK Broiler into a larger, more male-oriented sandwich: a larger chicken patty with mayonnaise served on a Whopper bun. In 2002, BK changed the name of the sandwich to Chicken Whopper and added a smaller Chicken Whopper Jr. sandwich.[14][15] The company replaced the Chicken Whopper line with another broiled sandwich line in 2003, the BK Baguette line. The chicken sandwich, served on a fresh cooked baguette roll, and came in several varieties, all of which were topped with a series of ingredients that were low in fat. They were sold in the United States at one time, but are now sold only in the European market.[16] The failed Baguette line was replaced in North America with the current grilled chicken iteration, the TenderGrill sandwich.[17]

Although Wendy's was the first to have a value menu in 1989, Burger King decided to offer its own value menu in 1998.[18][19] This menu featured seven products: the Whopper Jr., a five-piece Chicken Tenders, a bacon cheeseburger, medium-sized French fries, medium soft drink, medium onion rings, and a small milkshake – all priced at 99¢ (USD). In 2002 and 2006, BK revamped its value menu by adding and removing several products such as chili and the Rodeo Cheeseburger.[20] Many of these items, such as Chili, tacos, the Sourdough burger (a product similar to the Whopper Jr., but with sourdough bread), and Chicken Tender sandwiches have since been discontinued, modified, or relegated to regional menu options.[21]

Returning to the practice of targeting the adult demographic as it had in 1978, BK introduced several new products to its menu in 2003. The new products included new or revamped chicken sandwiches, a new salad line, and its BK Joe brand of coffee.[22] The first of these items was the TenderCrisp chicken sandwich, an entirely new sandwich which featured a fried 5.2 oz (150 g) whole-muscle chicken breast on a corn-dusted roll. The sandwich was part of then-CEO Greg Brenneman's plans to bolster the company's revived "Have it your way" advertising program, which was designed to draw younger people to its stores.[23] Some items, including the Enormous Omelet Sandwich line and the BK Stacker line, brought negative attention due to the large portion size, amounts of unhealthy fats, and the presence of trans-fats.[24][25][26] At the time, many of the products featured higher-quality ingredients like whole chicken breast, Angus beef, Cheddar cheese, and pepper jack cheese.[27][28] Not all of the new products introduced under Blum's tenure met corporate sales expectations, the Baguette Chicken sandwiches being an example.[29] Others products, such as Burger King's line of "indulgent" burgers originally called the Angus Burger,[30] have undergone multiple reformulations. The Angus Steak burger was originally based around a 5 oz (140 g) frozen patty; despite high expectations from the company, the sandwich fared poorly.[31] After a reformulating program, it was relaunched in 2008 as the 5 oz (140 g) Angus Steakhouse burger.[32] With the introduction of a new multifunction broiler capable of cooking a more diverse set of products, Burger King replaced the Angus Steakhouse burger with the 7 oz (200 g) Steakhouse XT burger in 2009.[notes 4] In 2011, the company discontinued selling the product in the North American market, replacing it with the Chef's Choice Burger. The Chef's Choice Burger was removed in 2012. 2014 saw the introduction of the newest attempt at introducing a premium burger to the company's portfolio with the introduction of the A.1. Ultimate Cheeseburger in North America.

The Burger Bundles returned in 2011 with beef and chicken patty options.[11]

During 1997, BK revamped its French fries in North America. The improved fries were coated with a layer of potato-based starch, giving the fries a crisp shell that maintained its texture longer. The company introduced them in a series of advertisements that claimed the new fries tasted better than McDonald's fries in consumer taste comparisons. Other ads featured Mr. Potato Head in a series of demographically targeted commercials.[33] The fries were in research and development for over two years and already had been available in several markets when the advertising campaign began.[34] In Europe, BK also sells potato wedges, a type of French fry that is thick-cut and wedge-shaped. In 1991, the company introduced Twister fries, spiral-cut fries with a spicy coating, as part of a promotional push. Part of the product's appeal was they were served in a paper drink cup as opposed to the normal fry carton. The product was designed as a short-term promotion that would be periodically reintroduced.[35]

In 2002, Burger King offered "Shake 'em up Fries", which included a bag of fries and a packet of spices. The customer would add the spices to the fries and then shake the bag until the fries were coated.[36][37]

Beyond French fries, the company has introduced several other side products over the course of its existence. Onion rings have been part of the menu for the majority of BK history. Originally made from whole, sliced onions, they were reformulated into a formed product made from onion paste in 2001 as part of a menu revamp.[38] In the same 2001 menu revamp, the company added an onion ring-specific dipping sauce, and emphasized it again during its 99¢ BK Value Menu introduction in 2002.[39] As part of its BK Cravers value menu introduction in 2005, the company briefly sold jalapeño poppers accompanied by a side of ranch dressing as part of its national menu. The same menu added mozzarella sticks with a side of marinara sauce; the mozzarella sticks have since been relegated to a regional menu item in the United States, but are sold on the national menu in Canada.[40][41][notes 5]

One of Smith's significant contributions to the menu was the addition of a breakfast product line as part of the 1978 product line expansion. Up until that point, breakfast was not a market Burger King had served.[notes 6] Other than the addition of the Croissan'Wich in 1983, the breakfast menu remained almost identical to the McDonald's offerings until a menu revamp in 1986.[notes 7] This expansion introduced BK's A.M. Express product line, which included French toast sticks and mini-muffins.[42] The new breakfast line was designed to be portable, because studies had shown that an increasing percent of consumers were eating breakfast on the go.[43] Shortly after the introduction of the French toast stick products, BK partnered with Lender's Bagels to introduce a bagel breakfast sandwich. The new product was designed to drive sales in the morning by piquing customer's curiosity with a new taste. The product was tested for several months in BK's original home territory of Miami before a national roll-out.[44]

In the late 1990s, BK co-branded several of its breakfast products with former parent Pillsbury; Pillsbury produced a fresh-baked biscuit product for the chain in 1996 and miniature cinnamon rolls called Cini-Minis in 1998. As part of the cachet built into the products, Burger King advertises that products are cooked fresh in the restaurant each morning.[45][46][47]

With the effects of the late-2000s recession reducing breakfast traffic to the stores, Burger King announced that it was making the first wholesale changes to its breakfast line-up in many years.[48] In early 2010, Burger King tested a new group of breakfast products under its new BK Brunch product line; a reintroduced English muffin sandwich, a sandwich featuring ciabatta bread, a pair of breakfast bowls, and a non-alcoholic mimosa.[49] In September, a slightly modified variation of the menu was taken national during one of the largest menu expansions in the company's history. Chief Marketing Officer Mike Kappitt said breakfast produced 12 percent of the company's income, but that was only half of what McDonald's made. Part of the expansion was a major advertising campaign that encouraged people to change their minds about skipping breakfast at a time of high unemployment.[50] 3G Capital has continued the expansion of the breakfast program with the introduction of Quaker Oats Company oatmeal to its menu in late 2011. Oatmeal has been shown to be a popular addition to breakfast menus industry-wide due to its low cost, ease in preparation and perception as a healthy, whole-grain option. Analysts from industry analytic firm Technomic stated that it was a good move for Burger King to add a winning product to its menu, but that it should have tried to be more creative by adding other, similar products such as grits.[51]

As the company expanded both inside and outside the United States, it introduced localized versions of its products that conform to regional tastes and cultural or religious beliefs. In countries with predominantly Islamic populations, such as Saudi Arabia, pork is not served due to Muslim dietary laws. In Muslim countries, meat is slaughtered using the halal method and labeled as such.[52][53] Similar adaptations also occurred in Israel, where kosher dietary laws forbid the mixture of meat and dairy products. Before the company exited the country in 2010,[54] many of its locations in Israel were fully kosher.[55]

In many international markets, BK offers products or condiments that fit local tastes. For example, in Canada, BK offers poutine gravy and vinegar for its French fries, and peri-peri sauce is available as a sandwich topping in the United Kingdom.[56] Hungry Jack's, Burger King's Australian franchise, offers the "Aussie burger" with fried egg, beetroot, and other Australian flavors.[57] In Asian markets, dark-meat chicken is preferred over white meat, and poultry products sold in these markets often are advertised as such.[58][59] One of the more regionally differentiated lines of products is the company's dessert offerings. In the United States, BK offers several desserts, including Otis Spunkmeyer chocolate-chip cookies, apple pie slices, Hershey's Sundae pie slices (a type of chocolate creme pie), and a rotating pie as part of its dessert menu.[60][notes 8] Internationally the company sells turnovers, tortas, Cini-Minis, muffins, brownies, and vanilla soft-serve ice cream in cones and sundaes. In most markets where BK sells ice cream, it also sells a mix-in dessert under various names.[notes 9][61][62] Some of these international dessert products differ from the domestic products in terms of preparation; an example is the pies sold in Asian countries that are fried, turnover-style, instead of the deep-dish tart style associated with American sweet-filled pies.[63] While in most Southeast Asian markets such as Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam, rice is also available as a temporary or permanent fixture in the local menu. The rice-based meals are visibly divergent between these countries, in order to suit the local taste of each respective market.

Burger King cooks its foods in one of five ways: broiling, deep frying, baking, microwaving or frying. As noted in its mottos and advertisements, BK cooks its burgers and grilled chicken on an automated grill,[64] while its other chicken products, fish, sides, and breakfast sausage are deep-fried in vegetable oil.[65] BK prepares its biscuits, cinnamon rolls, and cookies by baking in a convection oven and microwaves its BK Veggie burger patty.[66][67][notes 10]

The predecessor to Burger King, Insta-Burger King, began deploying the original broiling device in 1952 when its owners, Matthew Burns and Keith Cramer, acquired the rights to George Read's Inst-Shake and Insta-Broiler machines. The Insta-Broiler cooked the burgers in a wire basket between two broilers, allowing the burgers to be cooked on both sides simultaneously. The machine was capable of cooking over 400 patties per hour, which allowed the company to grow rapidly. When McLamore and Edgarton opened their first Insta-Burger King location in Miami, they revamped the unit into what they called a "flame broiler" – the forerunner of the modern unit used by Burger King today.[68] After the acquisition of Insta-Burger King in 1954, the pair contracted the construction of the newly designed flame broilers to the SaniServ company of Indianapolis, Indiana, for the initial run of broilers.[notes 11] Eventually, the company moved the manufacturing contract for the broiler units to Nieco Automatic Broilers of Windsor, California, who manufactured all subsequent units until the start of the 2000s.[69]

When the time came for the company to develop a new broiler, it turned to its equipment manufacturer, Nieco, and St. Louis, Missouri-based Duke Manufacturing. Burger King's goal was to maintain the company's trademark flame broiling method while allowing more product options on a flexible cooking platform. The solutions that Nieco and Duke devised met that goal by using control features during cooking. The cooking methods employed by the two manufacturing companies vary in their methods; Nieco employed two chains, one that maintained a single speed and cooking temperature, and another that had a flexible speed setting and variable temperature control. Duke's solution utilizes an oven that cooks according to preset parameters for time and temperature, one heterogeneous product batch at a time.[notes 12] The first batch-style broiler was introduced in April 1999 and was tested in-store in central Wisconsin during the summer of 1999.[70]

Beyond the flexibility of the new broilers, the new equipment has several features intended to decrease operational costs. A more efficient design of the burners in the Nieco units produces a 30 percent reduction in energy consumption. The Duke units produce a $4,000 -$5,000 annual savings on energy compared to the original units, which ran approximately at full capacity all day. The units are so fuel-efficient that in many US states, the company and its franchises qualify for energy-efficiency rebates.[notes 13] However, and issue arose in September 2011 when the state of Washington department of health warned Burger King of issues with the Duke units. In multiple incidents in seven counties throughout the state, the Duke units were found to have cracked heat spreaders which resulted in under cooked products. Additionally, there was foreign material contamination caused by loose insulation resulting from the cracks as well as other issues.[71][72] Upon notification, Burger King released a statement that the company has notified franchisees and corporate-owned stores operating the Duke units with orders to repair the problem immediately. Additional training for operators was also ordered.[73]

Before any products are sold, the company pre-cooks the ingredients and holds them in a heated holding cabinet. To ensure that product consistency is maintained and to reduce the amount of products discarded as waste, Burger King utilizes a computerized monitoring system created by Integrated Control Corp, or ICC. The system, called Kitchen Minder, monitors time and temperature in the cabinets and notifies staff and managers when to prepare more food and discard older products. Initially developed from 1998 to 2000, the system is designed to work with a holding cabinet system that was developed by Duke. The initial test designs were time-consuming to program because each bay in the holding units had to be programmed manually. This meant several minutes were required for each product, which added up to several hours to program up to six units with eight bays each. When BK finally deployed the system in 2001,[74] the updated units utilized a Palm Pilot to configure the units using a custom program designed to easily configure the units via Infrared or serial port.[75] A kitchen flow software system that helps centralize information about the system was deployed in 2007; combined with the new equipment, it helped further reduce costs for the company and its franchises by calculating projected sales and actual usage.[76] Along with the holding system, Burger King deployed newer high-speed toasters to decrease make times; the new toasters, while faster, require more maintenance, which increases overall labor costs.[77]

During periods of high-volume sales, BK will pre-prepare high-demand items such as hamburgers and cheeseburgers; during slower periods all sandwiches are made to order. The Whopper sandwiches, premium sandwiches, and BK Veggies are all made when ordered.[78][79]

BK targets "value-oriented" customers with its BK Value Menu. In the United States, this menu contains products that are usually priced in the $1.00 to $1.49 range. In non-US markets, the BK Value Menu typically takes on a different name, with prices set to reflect the approximate value of one US dollar. Internationally, the company is standardizing its value menu under the King Deals banners that features items for sale at €1.00 in the EU and one dirham in Dubai.[80] In all the markets, the value menu usually includes smaller sandwiches and entrées, small-sized side orders, small-sized drinks, and desserts. In the United States, the value menu has a breakfast offering in the same format as the lunch/dinner value menu.[81]

As with all major fast food vendors, BK has a menu that specifically targets children. The company introduced its child-oriented product line in North America during the summer of 1990 with an advertising program called the Burger King Kid's Club. In the United States, the meal is called the Kids Club Meal and it is primarily positioned against the popular Happy Meal from McDonald's.[82] The meal includes an entrée, a side order, beverage, and a toy. The toy is usually a product tie-in with a movie or television show. The entrée and side offerings differ from market to market, as does portion size.

In the North American market, BK further divides its children's menu into three segments: toddler, kids, and "tween". The only difference between the first two groups is the prize offering; the toddler will receive an age-appropriate toy. The toys were originally designed by Kentwood, Michigan-based Sassy Inc., and were introduced in 2000 as a supplement to the company's existing children's line.[83] Burger King changed its toddler toy designer to Hudson, Ohio-based Little Tikes in 2003.[84]

The tween offering, introduced in 1999, is called the Big Kids Meal.[85] The Big Kids Meals consist of a double hamburger, a double cheeseburger, or a six-piece serving of Chicken Tenders plus a small order of fries, and a 16 US fl oz (470 ml) drink, and a toy. Further additions to the line included a six-piece serving of the company's Chicken Fries product. The introduction of the Big Kids Meal was not without controversy. McDonald's challenged Burger King's use of the name in a federal suit that claimed McDonald's had used the name first.[86] According to the filing, McDonald's stated the company had used the term in a limited manner in Michigan in 1998 as part of a promotion in Detroit.[notes 14] The suit was judged to be without merit and dismissed in a summary judgment.[87]

To appeal to the adult market, BK offers several sandwiches and other products made with higher-quality ingredients such as whole-breast chicken fillets, Angus beef, and other "premium" ingredients.[88] These sandwiches are usually served on a better-quality roll, such as baguettes or corn-dusted potato rolls. Through 2009 and 2010, the company added other higher-end product such as barbecued ribs, grilled fish, an improved grilled chicken sandwich, and an extra-thick burger called the Steakhouse XT.[89][notes 15] Several industry publications claimed that these new offerings disrupt the differentiation between the fast-food and casual-dining markets with a combination of taste, competitive pricing, speed of service, and convenience.[notes 16] The adult-oriented products of Burger King and its competitors have been criticized by restaurant industry commentators as a temporary blip. The "indulgent" products are seen as blurring the lines between the fast-food and casual-dining market segments and, while they draw in newer customers looking for value, the effect may only be temporary. The Muslims are permitted to eat the chicken fries and other flavors of chicken fries in burger king because it is denoting or relating to meat prepared as prescribed by Muslim law. Once the economic instabilities of the late-2000s recession fade, customers may return to such casual chains as Chili's and leave the fast food chains back where they started in terms of customer numbers and profits.[90]

BK targets specific sub-groups within the adult market. Products like the BK Stacker and BK XXL are aimed at late teen to young adult males; health-conscious individuals are offered products such as salads, grilled chicken, and veggie burgers.[91][92] Products such as the BK Veggie, a meatless burger initially introduced in 2002,[93] target the female and health-oriented demographic using a co-branded marketing program and a patty produced by the Kellogg Company's Morningstar Farms division.[66][94] Another sub-market in this group is on-the-go parents and commuters; The company's BK Chicken Fries—French-fry cut pieces of breaded chicken—is specifically targeted to this segment.[95][96] First introduced in 2005, the product was successful enough that Burger King expanded the marketing of chicken fries to the children's demographic with a kid's meal version of the product in 2007. The meal was launched with a cross-promotion in conjunction with Nickelodeon's SpongeBob SquarePants. The series of commercials raised the ire of the American Family Association due to perceived nudity concerns.[97]

One particular market target that was of importance to the company was identified as the "Superfan". The superfan was a demographic group that included individuals that are 18 to 49 years old, primarily male, who would visit a fast-food restaurant five times a month and eat fast food 16 times a month.[98] Burger King and their competitors hope to attract this group because of the large sums of money that they represent; an increase in sales to this group could drive an increase in global sales.[99] While superfans accounted for less than 20 percent of Burger King's customer base, they accounted for nearly 50 percent of the company's business. By focusing on this demographic group, the company could increase sales more readily; it was easier to generate more repeat visits by this demographic than it was to coax new customers to switch from other chains. The company has used advertising featuring its mascot, the Burger King, in tandem with new product rollouts such as its BK Wrapper product to help generate an increased number of visits by this client segment.[100]

With the slowing of the global economy due to the 2008 financial crisis, the company experienced a downside of focusing so much on this demographic group. The high unemployment of the recession, coupled with healthier eating habits, drove many customers away from fast food towards the fast-casual segment or forced them to stop eating out. Analysts have stated that by focusing its marketing and advertising programs on men, BK alienated women and children. Morgan Stanley analyst John Glass stated, "Maybe catering to the super fan was the correct strategy to kick-start the business, but maybe they relied on that for too long..."[101]

To help counter the perceived male bias of its superfan target group, the company expanded the definition in early 2010 to cover individuals of both sexes, all ages, and households who frequent fast food within the stated time frame. Throughout 2010, the company added newer calorie-conscious "Positive Steps" combo meals that were advertised in female-oriented media, as well as a continuing cross-promotional tie-in with the female-oriented Twilight film series.[notes 17] 3G Capital's new management team eliminated the focus on the superfan after its acquisition the company in 2010, concentrating on a more broad demographic base that includes women and more health conscious customers.[51]

One of the company's first forays into healthier products was in 1983 with introduction of its salad bar. The salad bar met with light to moderate success, but the company's franchise holders complained of high operating costs and a poor return on investment.[102] Part of the product, a pita salad, was quickly dropped from the salad bar, as were plans to use the bar unit to boost breakfast sales.[103] In 1987 the company augmented its salad bar with a test line of prepackaged salads, including chef and garden salads.[104] The salad bar was eventually eliminated in favor of packaged salads. In 1990, BK introduced a new salad line accompanied by a licensing agreement with Paul Newman's Newman's Own, Inc., whose salad dressings accompanied the products.[105][106] Burger King revamped its salad line again in 2004, with the introduction of its Fire Grilled Salad products.[107] Burger King sought to differentiate this line of salads by packaging the warm meat toppings—a choice of grilled shrimp or broiled chicken—separately from the cold salad; this added the appearance of an additional layer of freshness.[108] At one point in the United States, the salads are pre-made off-site. They are sold with two toppings and Ken's Foods Ken's Steakhouse brand salad dressing. Internationally, the salads vary in composition and style from market to market. In all markets, salads are one of the items targeted at female and health-conscious consumers. In parts of Europe, salads are sold under the "King Delight" or "LA Range" banner.[109][110]

As a response to recent obesity trends in the United States and other nations, Burger King modified its menu and food preparation practices. In addition to offering lower-fat menu item such as salads, the company has updated its nutrition guides to include dietary guidelines and other nutritional data. One of its reactions to the concerns over trans-fats was to initiate a program in January 2008 to phase out added trans-fat in its products, and to switch to pure vegetable oils that are free of hydrogenated fats.[111] The program ended in early 2009 with a complete changeover to the new oils. Most, but not all, of the products contain no added trans-fats; some products, such as the beef used in the hamburgers, still contain naturally occurring trans-fats.[112]

To address concerns over the increase in childhood obesity in Western nations and accusations of unhealthy offerings for children by groups such as the Center for Science in the Public Interest,[113] the company created a nutritional program called "BK Positive Steps" that is aimed at children and their families.[114] The program began with the introduction of products such as broiled Chicken Tenders, Kraft Macaroni and Cheese, and apple "fries", which are French cut apples served in a fry box that are featured in a new low-fat Kid's Club Meal.[115][116] According to a statement by Burger King, the new Kid's Club meals contain no more than 560 calories per meal, less than 30 percent of calories from fat, less than 10 percent of calories from saturated fat, no added trans fats, and no more than 10 percent of calories from added sugars.[117][118] Additional changes to its menu were announced in May 2009, including the reduction of sodium levels in its Chicken Tenders product by approximately 33 percent; a switch to non-fat milk products in the U.S.; and adding calcium-fortified apple juice to its beverage line-up.[119][notes 18] The broiled Chicken Tenders product is only sold in the UK/Ireland market. The product line has been expanded to include a boiled mini chicken sandwich for the kid's meals in this region.[notes 19]

The company has adapted its menu to accommodate different dietary lifestyles by adding several vegetarian options, including salads, the BK Veggie sandwich, and its deep-fried spicy bean burger that is sold in Burger King's international locations.[120] The majority of these products do not qualify as vegan due to the presence of egg or dairy products;[notes 20] an example is the BK Veggie, which is approved by the British Vegetarian Society. Society guidelines do not require their approved products to be vegan, and allow ovo-lacto-vegetarian ingredients.[121] The Veggie Burger is widely sold in other countries, sometimes under different names (for example, it is called a "Country Burger" in Germany).[notes 21] The Impossible Whopper became available in the United States in 2019.[122][123] Burger King added low-carb variants of several of its products in 2004 that are in accordance with low-carb diets such as the Atkins diet and the South Beach Diet.[124] Low-carbohydrate preparation consists of eliminating the bread and serving the product in a bowl with silverware.[125]

In January 2010, BK began to publish a list of which of their products that contain gluten and added menu options designed to help those afflicted with Celiac disease as part of its "Positive Steps" nutrition program. A company representative stated that it understands that its guests have individual dietary needs, and as part of its "Have It Your Way" promise, Burger King offers menu items for individuals with gluten sensitivity.[126][127] BK food is prepared with several known food allergens, including wheat, milk, soy, and eggs.[notes 22]

The range of products sold usually depends on the time of day. Lunch items such as hamburgers and fries are traditionally not served during breakfast time. However, some BK stores do sell food under their "Burgers for Breakfast" program.[128] While for several years the company dictated hours to its franchisees in the United States, that changed with the sale of the company in 2010. The new owners relaxed the mandated hours for stores to be open from 6 am to midnight Monday through Saturday and 7 am to midnight on Sundays; franchises were encouraged to stay open later or for 24 hours in markets that could support the business.[129][130]

Burger King's product packaging has undergone many changes over the years. Unlike McDonald's, the company never used the clamshell style box made of Styrofoam, so when the environmental concerns over Styrofoam came to a head in the late 1980s, the company touted its use of paperboard boxes for its sandwiches.[131][132] When McDonald's moved to eliminate its styrofoam packaging, Burger King ran several sarcastically worded ads in national newspapers stating that it had always wrapped its sandwiches in waxed paper; they welcomed McDonald's "to the club".[notes 23] To cut back on the amount of paper that the company used, the paperboard box was mostly eliminated in 1991; it was replaced with waxed paper.[notes 24] Paperboard boxes are still used for its "finger food" products like Chicken Tenders and Fries, French toast sticks, and desserts.[133]

In 2004, the company committed itself to a redesign of its entire packaging line that tied the packaging into its irreverent advertising campaign created by Crispin, Porter + Bogusky. Each product's packaging included a tongue-in-cheek commentary about the product itself. Alex Bogusky, partner and executive creative director of CP+B, stated that BK decided "to create a dialogue with the consumer" by utilizing the large areas of white space found on its packaging at the time. All of its sandwich wrappers, cartons, tray liners, bags, breakfast platters, chili cups, condiments, and regional product packaging received what was described as "quirky ad copy" specifically targeting the 18–34-year-old male demographic segment. Besides the humorous commentary, the company also created sniglet-type names for things that would appear in its products, such as a "ringer" – a single onion ring that had been accidentally included in an order of fries.[134][135]

Starting with the introduction of its BK Chicken Fries product in 2005, BK began adapting some of its product packaging so that it could be placed in an automotive cup holder. The BK Chicken Fry box, while square in shape, will sit comfortably in the cup holder and its top, when opened, forms a small tray that is designed to hold dipping sauce. Burger King credits the design of this box with helping to make its Chicken Fries the most popular adult-oriented chicken product in the United States.[136] It has since added a trademarked and patented round French fry container which it calls the "FryPod", which is a paper cup made from 50 percent recycled materials that is designed to fit in an automotive cup holder.[137] The package design won an honorable mention at a packaging industry design competition.[138] BK's large and King sized beverage containers are made from molded HDPE plastic with a funnel-like shaped bottom that allows the oversized cups to fit in cup holders.

Union Packaging, a minority-owned, Philadelphia-based paper products company, has supplied much of the packaging for Burger King's North American operations since winning its first contract in 2000. The original $15 million contract was for paperboard "clamshell" containers and covered 1,250 BK locations in the United States.[notes 25] Union was instrumental in the development of the FryPod carton, and its efforts earned the company a supplier of the year award from Burger King in 2007.[139]

Over time, the company reformulates various products in an attempt to boost sales of the product or to improve the taste, appearance, or physical consistency of the product. One such example of this is the BK Big Fish, the company's fish sandwich offering in North America. Burger King's original fish sandwich, introduced as early as the late 1960s in some markets, was called the Whaler; it was a smaller fish sandwich made with tartar sauce and lettuce served on the small sesame seed roll BK used for their hamburgers. When Burger King introduced its broiled chicken sandwich in 1990, the BK Broiler, it changed the fish sandwich's breading to a panko style, began serving it on an oatmeal-dusted roll that was used for the broiled chicken sandwich, and renamed the product the Ocean Catch sandwich.[140] When BK reformulated the BK Broiler, the company also reformulated the Ocean Catch as the BK Big Fish in its current configuration.[141] The sandwich was again briefly reformulated after the phase-out of the Baguette sandwiches, and was reintroduced as the Big Fish in 2005.[142]

One of the company's larger product reformulations came in March 2011. The company updated the recipe of its 25+ year-old Chicken Tender product line by reformulating the breading and spice mixture while updating the shape. The new formulation was described by the company as being "more broadly appealing" to the palate of its customers according to statement released by the company. Nation's Restaurant News analyst John Barone stated that the change may also be due to an industry wide move to chicken-based product as a result of raising commodity prices, forcing restaurants to turn towards chicken-based offerings due to the elevated pork and beef prices occurring during the previous year. He added that chicken breast costs have been down or flat during the same period, making it a more appealing choice to companies. The new product push was accompanied with a product tie-in with the movie Hop aimed at the youth market, an adult-oriented advertising campaign pushing convenience and product customization and a nationwide coupon mailing in the United States. Online advertising was emphasized with the release a Facebook gaming application it called the "Tender 8".[143]

To generate additional sales, BK will occasionally introduce limited time offers (LTO) that are versions of its core products or new products intended for either long- or short-term sales. Many of these LTO products focus on core menu products such as the Whopper, which has featured variations such as the Texas Double Whopper with added jalapeños, bacon, and pepperjack cheese. Other LTOs include all-new sandwiches like the Chick'n Crisp sandwich (now a permanent item in many regions) and test products such as the company's Great American Burger, which was an attempt at a premium sandwich in 2003. It was made with a Whopper patty and several new ingredients, including a bakery-style bun; peppered bacon; whole-leaf, as opposed to shredded, lettuce; seasoned mustard; and a special sauce. The burger was served with American cheese, mayonnaise, tomato, and onions.[144] A similar burger was tested in Wisconsin in 1999. That Great American burger featured a single 8 oz (230 g) burger patty and different toppings. It was designed to be cooked on a forerunner of the current batch broiler.[notes 26]

Other LTO products sought to expand existing product lines with new base ingredients. The company's 1992 offering, a Meatloaf Specialty Sandwich, was introduced as part of a push into limited table service.[145][146] Other LTO variants in its Specialty Sandwich line included an Italian sausage sandwich served in one of three ways: with onions and peppers; parmigiana-style with mozzarella cheese and marinara sauce; or with all four ingredients. Steak sandwiches were made from steak fillets or later, restructured beef. Other offerings were a ham and cheese sandwich with mayonnaise, lettuce, and tomato, and a veal parmigiana sandwich.[147]

The company is not above following trends within the fast food and fast casual industry; two examples of this can be seen in some of its former products. The company's first wrap product, called a BK Wrapper, was introduced in North America as a breakfast option in April 2008, with a lunch/dinner version offered in September 2008.[148] These products were in response to industry trends towards products that are easier to consume on the go,[149] and to trends that began in 2007 regarding smaller foods.[150] Originally a limited time offer,[notes 27] the lunch/dinner version of this product was sold as a regional item through late 2009, when they were eliminated due to weakening sales. The 2009 introduction of BK Burger Shots, Burger King's version of sliders, was part of a wider trend in the restaurant industry for this type of sandwich.[151][152] European locations sell them as the BK Six Pack.[citation needed] In the United States they are based on the Burger Bundles/Burger Buddies products of the 1980s, which were originally inspired by the similar products sold at White Castle and Krystal.[notes 28][153]

In 2007, Burger King began licensing its logo and items to outside companies for non-Burger King products. A licensed products company, Broad Street Licensing Group, and its manufacturing partner, the Inventure Group, introduced the first products in the fall of that year: flavored potato crisps in two flavors, flame-broiled burger and French fries with ketchup. Inventure added a third flavor, onion rings, in 2008.[154] A second licensed product, the company's child-oriented BK Fresh Apple Fries, was licensed for sale in supermarkets in 2009 to the Cruch Pak company.[155] The company stated that while the products are important in providing brand identity, they will not be concentrating their resources on them, and will be investing the licensing fees into the company's marketing fund. Industry pundits have criticized the company for this scheme, with Rob Frankel, author of the book The Revenge of Brand X, stating "just because you can do something does not mean you should."[notes 29]

The licensing deals have proven successful. Broad Street has expanded the product line to seventeen countries across the globe while increasing selection to more than a half dozen products designed to mimic the flavors of some of Burger King's core menu products. The success of the product line and licensing deals garnered the companies an award for "Brand Extension of the Year" from License! Global magazine, and earned them a nomination for "Best Corporate License of the Year" from the Licensing Industry Merchandisers Association.[156]

ConAgra Foods entered into a licensing agreement with Burger King in 2009 for a new line of microwavable French fry products. The new products are King Krinkz, which are seasoned crinkle-cut fries; King Kolossalz, an extra-large package of fries; and King Wedgez, seasoned potato wedges. The products were slated to be released in September 2009. The packaging is designed to resemble BK's FryPod fry container.[157]

Burger King has introduced several new products that performed well in testing, but did not catch on with the public. The failure of the BK Baguette line of sandwiches is an example of a product that did not meet corporate expectations; another earlier failure was the Bull's-eye Barbecue Burger. The sandwich consisted of two side-by-side hamburger patties, American cheese, and bacon, with Bull's-eye Barbecue brand barbecue sauce. The sandwich was served on the same 7 in (18 cm) roll as the Specialty Sandwiches. Later it was sold as a traditional-style double cheeseburger.[158]

In 1992, during its time under the ownership of Britain-based Grand Metropolitan, Burger King experimented with table service.[159] After 4 pm, customers would place their order at the counter, and their order would be brought to them at their table. Customers were given complimentary popcorn to eat while waiting for their meal. To coincide with the offering, a series of meals called the Dinner baskets were introduced. The dinner baskets included the Whopper Dinner Basket, Steak Sandwich Dinner Basket, Fried Chicken Dinner Basket, and Shrimp Dinner Basket. In the New England region of the United States, BK sold a Fried clam Basket. The dinner came with two sides, including a choice of a side salad, cole slaw, French fries, or baked potato. Lasting approximately a year, the sit-down restaurant concept was abandoned in 1994 in favor of the original quick-service formula.[160]

Another failed product, this time under Grand Metropolitan's successor Diageo, was the BK Back Porch Grillers line of burgers that featured a spiced and flavored patty served on a bakery-style roll. There were two varieties: The Regular served with mayonnaise, whole leaf iceberg lettuce, tomato and grilled onions, and the Bacon Cheddar, with bacon and smoked cheddar cheese. There was one LTO variety, the Black Stack Griller, made with Black Strap Barbecue sauce (a strong molasses-flavored sauce), Swiss cheese, bacon, and onions, to promote Men in Black II. The Griller patty was flavored so that it had a taste similar to a hamburger that had been grilled over a charcoal-fired grill.[161]

One of its international failures was the BK Crown Jewels line of sandwiches, originally sold in New Zealand. These larger, adult-oriented sandwiches were made with fried and grilled chicken or a Whopper patty and a variety of toppings and served on a Kaiser roll. Toppings included a mango lime sauce, avocado, aioli, a Cajun spiced sauce, and relish. Originally successful, the sandwiches piqued the interest of Burger King's corporate offices and were being considered for a potential global rollout. However, interest in the product faded and they were discontinued.[162]

Introduced as a direct challenge of corporate rival McDonald's, the Big King was Burger King's response to the Big Mac and had a similar style and taste.[notes 30] The sandwich was originally introduced in 1993 under the name Double Supreme during its testing stage. The name was switched to Big King when it was introduced nationally in 1997, and again to the King Supreme when reintroduced in 2002.[163] The sandwich was discontinued in the North American market in the mid-2000s. In November 2013, Burger King brought the Big King back to the North American market as a permanent menu item. The Big King sandwich's recipe is exactly the same as the original 1990s recipe, including a three-piece roll.[164] The Big King sandwich is also sold in many of the company's international markets in several forms.[notes 31][notes 32]

Like many of its competitors, BK has been targeted by various animal welfare groups, such as PETA, over the treatment of the animals it uses in the manufacture of its ingredients. In a concession to these groups, BK agreed to adopt a series of policies for its suppliers for several of its raw animal products. The company has established a preference for purchasing eggs and pork-based products from those suppliers that use cage-free production methods.[165]

As part of its 2001 guidelines, Burger King stated that it would begin conducting announced and unannounced inspections of the slaughterhouses for all of its meat suppliers and take action against facilities that fail those inspections. It would establish animal-handling verification guidelines for all the slaughterhouses of its suppliers. The company would require its suppliers to confine no more than five hens in each battery cage, that the birds be able to stand fully upright, and require the presence of two water drinkers per cage. It would stop purchasing from suppliers who engage in the forced molting of hens, develop auditing procedures for the handling of "broiler" chickens, and institute humane handling procedures for chickens at slaughterhouses. It would begin purchasing pork from farms that do not confine sows to stalls.[166]

Per the conditions of its agreement with the groups, the company filed a petition in 2002 with the Food and Drug Administration requesting the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) step up enforcement of the Humane Slaughter Act of 1958. The USDA agreed with the request, stating "it is granting your petition and is developing a proposed rule that addresses the issue of humane handling." The USDA failed to indicate when it intended to publish the proposal in the Federal Register and solicit public comment, which would be the first step before the agency drafts a final rule.[notes 33]

The company amended its purchasing guidelines in 2008. It announced that it would expand its pork purchasing guidelines by requiring 10% of its pork products be purchased from suppliers who do not use gestation crates, metal enclosures that confine sows and restrict the animal's movement, and double that amount by the end of the year.[167] It would also immediately begin purchasing 2% of its eggs from producers whose hens are not confined to small wire battery cages, and double that amount by the end of that year.[notes 34] It agreed with PETA that the company would issue a statement that it would be give purchasing preference to egg suppliers that do not use battery cages and to those poultry suppliers that utilize or upgrade to controlled atmosphere killing, which is considered to be a more humane method of chicken and turkey slaughter.[168]

A third round of guidelines was issued in April 2012 when the company announced that it would begin phasing in a plan to stop purchasing poultry and pork products from suppliers that caged animals. With this announcement, Burger King became the first American Fast food company to promise to purchase 100% of its eggs from companies that did not utilize wire battery cages and pork from suppliers that did not use gestational cages for sows. This is an increase of the percentage of cage free products from 9% of egg purchases and 20% of pork purchases the company made in 2008.[169] The plan should be completed by 2017.[170][needs update]

The H.J. Heinz Company is a significant supplier of condiments to Burger King.[171] They have worked together on several programs such as the 2001 promotional tie-in with the movie Shrek. Heinz provided an LTO Blastin' Green EZ Squirt colored ketchup and an apple flavored "ooze" dipping sauce for distribution with the Shrek-branded kid's meals.[172][173] Heinz has become a primary supplier of ketchup in the United States, Mexico, and Great Britain, while supplying various sauces in several European countries.[174][175][176][notes 35]

Kraft foods has supplied many of its products to BK over the years. Several of its condiment lines have found their way into BK menu items. Two Kraft products were involved in direct tie-ins: the Bull's-Eye BBQ Burger in 2005 and the A-1 Steakhouse XT sandwich in 2010. In both cases, Burger King prominently used the names of the Kraft products, A1 Steak Sauce and Bull's-Eye Barbecue Sauce, in the names of the sandwiches.[notes 36][notes 37] Kraft has supplied several of Burger King's children's products, including a Jell-O brand dessert during BK's Teletubbies promotion in 1999, and the Kraft macaroni and cheese used in its lower-fat kid's meals introduced in 2009.[177][notes 38]

During the late 1960s, Tyson Foods was devising new methods to broaden their market, including introducing smaller consumer packaging and landing military contracts. The company expanded its commercial division by offering new products to McDonald's and Burger King. Tyson's McDonald's product eventually evolved into Chicken McNuggets while Burger King's product became the basis of its chicken sandwiches.[178] For their 2010 rib promotion, Tyson was Burger King's pork supplier. Despite a production-significant lead time, the estimated four-month product supply lasted Burger king less than three months.[179]

A 1996 E. Coli outbreak at one of Burger King's largest beef providers, Hudson Foods, gave Tyson Foods one of its largest business coups. Hudson was one of the largest poultry providers in the United States and one of Tyson's largest competitors when they moved into beef processing at the behest of Burger King. Once it had secured a contract with Burger King, Hudson opened a beef processing plant in Nebraska. When the plant was identified as the source of an E. Coli breakout in 1996, Burger King abandoned the company as a supplier.[180]

Lopez Foods, Inc. of Oklahoma City is a supplier of beef to the Burger King.[181] While Lopez's primary customer is McDonald's, the company supplies BK as well.

McCain Foods became a supplier of potato products to the company in 1998, shortly after an agreement with farmers in Maine to supply potatoes for use in the fast food market.[182]

Edwards Baking provides Burger King with prepackaged pies and pie-style desserts while providing oversight and assistance with the chain's dessert products. BK is one of Edwards' major national contracts, where the company provides Burger King with assistance in marketing programs, point-of-purchase advertising materials, market research, and other resources. Edwards has a full-time staff assigned to Burger King's headquarters in Miami.[183] Before Edwards became Burger King's primary baked goods supplier, the chain had a contract with Awrey Bakeries of Livonia, Michigan, for its line of pre-packaged breakfast products. Burger King sold a line of Awrey products including danish, doughnuts, and birthday cakes.[184]

Traditionally Burger King has sold soft drinks from the Coca-Cola Company in its home market. In 1983, PepsiCo garnered the $444 million beverage supplier contract from its rival, and, in the midst of extreme market debate over the future of the contract, had it renewed for a second term in 1987.[185] The company won the contract by strengthening the marketing and advertising program ties between Burger King and itself.[186][187] The contract lasted three more years when, partially based upon Pepsi's growth as a restaurant operator with its Tricon Restaurants division, Burger King moved its beverage contract back to Coca-Cola.[188][189]

Since 1990, Burger King has continued using Coca-Cola as its beverage supplier, renewing its contract several times.[190] The Coca-Cola contract is not without its problems; the 1999 contract called for the Coca-Cola branded Icee products to be made a permanent menu item in all American locations. After the rollout, it was discovered that Coca-Cola employees had faked product test information to bolster prospective sales numbers in an effort to entice franchisees to enroll in a summertime advertising push. Several Coke employees were terminated, and Coca-Cola changed the in-store promotional materials to emphasize the Icee name.[191] The 2003 contract officially extended the relationship between the two companies so that Coca-Cola was the exclusive supplier of soft drinks for the company.[notes 39] Before this, individual international franchises would negotiate their own contracts with their company of choice. The 2003 contract gave Coca-Cola new access to the 3,000 operating or planned restaurants on the Asia-Pacific rim, in Europe, and in South and Central America.[notes 40] The purchase of Burger King by 3G Capital lead to a change in the beverage contract for the Caribbean and Latin America markets. 3G, which owns AmBev and is the producer and distributor of PepsiCo products in the region, started cross-licensing between its two companies in April 2011 and switched to Pepsi in these markets.[192]

In 1999, Burger King added a second soft drink supplier contract with the Dr Pepper Snapple Group to include Dr Pepper to its beverage line up in North American restaurants.[193]

Burger King's supply contracts for non-carbonated beverages are separate from the ones for its sodas. When the company first chose to introduce a bottled water product, it chose Nestlé's Poland Spring brand over Coke's Dasani. When the contract expired in 2003, BK moved to Pepsi's Aquafina, the top-selling brand at the time.[notes 41] In 2008 Burger King renewed its relationship with Nestlé by entering into an agreement to sell Pure Life bottled water products.[194] BK moved away from Pepsi's Tropicana brand juices in 2001 when it went with Coca-Cola's Minute Maid brands for the North America market.[195] With the introduction of its Positive Steps nutrition program for children, the company turned to the Hershey Company to provide Hershey's branded low-fat milk in its North American stores. BK is utilizing a popular brand name to promote its products in a move to draw customers' attention to itself and its meal programs.[196]

Produced by Sara Lee's Douwe Egberts brand,[197] BK Joe was Burger King's coffee line that was first introduced in 2001 in North America and later in parts of Europe.[197] Advertised as being made from Arabica coffee, the product was made using Douwe's Cafitesse system, a platform that eschews coffee brewed from ground beans in favor of a beverage made from a coffee concentrate with hot water added.[198][199] Sara Lee claims the advantage of the system is that each cup of coffee is made at the time of order with minimal waste and labor.[200] The product was not designed to compete with products from companies such as Starbucks, but was intended to appeal to customers who seek a consistent cup of coffee.[201]

Despite the investment in the Douwe Egbert product, Burger King announced it would be phasing out the Cafitesse system in the United States in the summer of 2010 in favor of Starbucks' Seattle's Best brand of coffee.[202] Throughout the summer of 2010, BK added several new coffee-based products to the new coffee line in an initial effort to bring in more customers during the morning sales period.[203][notes 42] The new coffee products, including flavored coffees and iced coffee drinks, are available all day to compete with McDonald's McCafé coffee line.[204] Every Friday during November 2010, Burger King gave away free 12 US fl oz (350 ml) cups of Seattle's Best Coffee to encourage people to try its breakfast and coffee lines. The company predicted the number of free cups of coffee would number between two and four million.[notes 43]

For many years Burger King has sold beer in several of its international locations, such as Germany, but not in its home territory. The company began to sell beer at its BK Whopper Bar limited service concept restaurants in Miami, New York, and Los Angeles in 2010. The company is selling products from SABMiller and Anheuser-Busch, including Budweiser, Bud Lite, and Miller Lite in aluminum bottles designed to maintain temperature. The move, designed to target the important 30-and-under demographic, has been called risky by industry analysts because the company is known as a fast food purveyor and not as an alcoholic beverages seller. Other industry consultants have disagreed with the assessment, believing that the move is timely because the company is growing with its aging customer base.[205][206][207]

For many years Burger King owned and operated its own distribution system, known originally as Distron. Distron, founded shortly after establishment of Burger King, primarily served the company-owned stores and 50–60 percent of franchised stores. Franchise groups were free to purchase supplies from one of seventeen independent distribution systems, often operated by larger franchise groups such as Carrols Restaurant Group.[208] The Distron setup remained relatively stable until BK was purchased from Pillsbury by Grand Metropolitan. Grand Met originally planned to sell it after the purchase, but ended up reorganizing the division into two separate groups for procurement (Burger King Purchasing [BKP]) and distribution (Burger King Distribution Services [BKDS]). The move resulted in the layoff of over a hundred staff members.[209][210][211]

In 1992, Burger King and its franchises formed Restaurant Services Inc. (RSI), an independent purchasing cooperative, which covered 100 percent of BK stores in the United States. The creation of RSI was based on a proposal by then-CEO Barry Gibbons create an organization that would be autonomous from BK corporate operations, provide full financial disclosure to participants on pricing issues and revenues, and enjoy the participation of the entire chain to maximize the benefits of volume purchasing. The format of RSI was based on the system employed by KFC for its distribution system and was operated in a similar manner.[212] Two weeks after the formation of the co-operative, Grand Met sold the physical assets of BKDS to Canadian-based buyout firm Onex Corporation and folded BKP into RSI.[notes 44]

Currently the company utilizes independent distributors such as Maines Paper and Food Service and Sysco for supplying North American stores with food and paper products.[213][214][215]The Captivity of Mangalorean Catholics at Seringapatam (1784–1799) was a 15-year-long imprisonment of Mangalorean Catholics and other Christians at Seringapatam, in the Carnataca region of India by Tippu Sultan; who was the de facto ruler of the Kingdom of Mysore following its usurpation.[1] Estimates of the number of captives range from 30,000 to 80,000, but the generally accepted figure is 60,000, as stated by Tippu himself in the Sultan-ul-Tawarikh.[2] The captivity was the most disconsolate period in the community's history.[3]

The Catholic Christians of Mangalore flourished during the regime of Tipu's father, Hyder Ali. Soon after Tipu inherited the territory in January 1784, he issued orders to seize the Christian community in Canara, confiscate their estates & deport them to Seringapatam. His orders were carried out on 24 February 1784. Mangalorean churches were demolished and the stones were used to build the Sultan Battery.[4] About twenty thousand Christians died during the difficult journey, from South Canara to Seringapatam. The Christians of Canara suffered extreme hardships, torture, and executions. Many converted in captivity to Sunni Islam, the official religion of the Ottoman Caliphate, whose approval and assistance was sought by Tippu Sultan.[5][6][7][8][9] The captivity brought the once flourishing Christian community of Mangalore close to extermination.[1] The captivity ended when Tippu died on 4 May 1799, at the Siege of Seringapatam, led by the English East India Company and its allies; such as the Nizam of Hyderabad. Of the 60,000–80,000 Christians taken captive, only 15,000–20,000 both survived and retained their original Catholic Christian faith. The captivity left an impact on the literature of Mangalorean Catholics.[10] The bi-centennial anniversary of the Christians' release from captivity was commemorated across the South Canara area on 4 May, 1999.

Roman Catholics from the South Canara district by the south-western coast of India, under the jurisdiction of the Mangalore Diocese, are generally known as Mangalorean Catholics.[11] They are Konkani people who speak the Konkani language.[12] All earlier records of South Canara's Christians were lost at the time of their deportation by Tipu in 1784 and it is not known when Christianity was introduced in South Canara. It is possible that Syrian Christians settled in South Canara as they had in Malabar, a region south of Canara.[13] During the 13th century Italian traveller Marco Polo recorded that there were considerable trading activities between the Red Sea and the Canara coast. Scholars have surmised that foreign Christian merchants were visiting the coastal towns of South Canara during that period for commerce, and that some Christian priests possibly accompanied them in their evangelical work.[14] In 1321, the French Dominican friar Jordan de Catalunya of south-western France, arrived in Bhatkal, North Canara.[15] According to historian Severine Silva, no concrete evidence has yet been found that there were any permanent settlements of Christians in South Canara before the 16th century.[14]

Propagation of Christianity in the region only began after the arrival of the Portuguese in 1498,[14] when Vasco da Gama's landed on St Mary's Islands in South Canara and planted a cross there on his voyage from Portugal to India.[16]
In 1500, the Portuguese explorer Pedro Álvares Cabral arrived at Anjediva in North Canara with eight Franciscan missionaries under the leadership of Frei Henrique Soares de Coimbra. On arrival they converted 22 or 23 natives to Christianity in the Mangalore region.[17] In 1526, during the viceroyship of Lopo Vaz de Sampaio, the Portuguese took possession of Mangalore[18] whereupon Portuguese Franciscans began slowly spreading Christianity in Mangalore.[18]

Contemporary Mangalorean Catholics are descended mainly from the Goan Catholic settlers, who migrated to Canara from Goa, a state north of Canara, between 1560 and 1763 in three major waves. The first wave of immigrants came to Mangalore to escape the trials of the Goa Inquisition of 1560. These migrants were welcomed by the native Bednore rulers of Canara for their agricultural skills. They were followed by a second major wave precipitated by the Portuguese–Adil Shahi Wars in the 1570s. A final influx of immigrants arrived during the Mahratta Invasions of Goa and Bombay in the late 17th & early 18th centuries.[19] According to Mangalorean historian Alan Machado Prabhu, the Mangalorean Catholics numbered about 58,000 by the time of the capture of Canara by Hyder Ali in 1765.[20]

By 1686, Seringapatam, capital of the Kingdom of Mysore, was home to a community of more than 400 Catholic Christians who were severely harassed in the following two decades when their churches were destroyed and the priest's house confiscated.[21] This destruction was undertaken in the name of the Wodeyar king, Kanthirava Narasaraja I by his finance minister. The priest's house was eventually returned to the church in 1709.[21] Sometime between 1700 and 1717, another church was built in Rampura, a suburb of Seringapatam, in the face of local opposition.[21] Relations between the Wodeyars and the Mangalorean Catholics improved until 1717, when an anti-Christian purge led to the expulsion of the resident priest who was thereafter forbidden to preach.[22] Several more anti-Christian demonstrations followed, but by 1736 relations had once more improved between the two groups.[22]

Hyder Ali, born in 1721 or 1722 at Budikote in the northern part of Mysore State,[23][24] joined the Mysorean Army and distinguished himself in the 1749 Siege of Devanahalli.[25] He took part in the Carnatic wars of (1751–1755) and gained in-depth experience of warfare. Hyder Ali rapidly rose to power at the Mysore court and soon became prime minister and general of the king.[26] From 1761 onwards, he took de facto control of the throne of the Mysore Kingdom through the Wodeyar dynasty.[27] In 1763, he occupied Mangalore and Canara,[28] but maintained amicable relations with the Christians. Historian Severine Silva states, "the general relations between Hyder and Christians form a chapter which has been entirely lost."[29] Hyder was close friends with two Goan Catholic priests, Bishop Noronha, and Fr Joachim Miranda.[30] Sehwarts, a Protestant missionary, also lived at the court of Hyder.[31] However, Hyder was also involved in suppressing the Jesuit order.[32]

Hyder's army included several Catholic soldiers and he allowed Christians to build a church within the Seringapatam Fort where French generals offered prayers and priests visited. Mangalorean historian A.L.P. D'Souza mentions that Hyder had also used Canara Christians for administrative purposes. In accordance with the two treaties concluded with Portugal, Hyder allowed Portuguese priests to settle disputes among the Christians.[33] Despite this, the Christians in general resented Hyder Ali's rule because of the heavy taxes they were made to pay to the king's treasury.[34]

In February 1768, the British captured Mangalore and Canara from Hyder.[28] At the end of the same year, Hyder, along with his son Tipu Sultan, defeated the British and recaptured Mangalore. After the conquest, Hyder was informed that the Mangalorean Catholics had helped the British in their conquest of Mangalore. Hyder believed that this behaviour amounted to treachery against the sovereign.[35] Summoning a Portuguese officer and several Christian priests from Mangalore, he asked for suggestions as to how the Mangalorean Catholics should be punished. The Portuguese officer suggested the death penalty for those Catholics who had helped the British, as it was the standard punishment for betraying a sovereign. Rather than follow this advice, Hyder chose a diplomatic stance and imprisoned Christians found guilty of treachery instead of executing them.[36] Later, he opened negotiations with the Portuguese. Agreement was reached and suspicions against the clergy and the Christians were removed and they were no longer chastised.[37] During Hyder's regime, Roman Catholicism in Mangalore and the Mangalorean Catholic community continued to flourish.[38]

According to historian Severine Silva, Hyder followed the same policy of religious tolerance towards Christians as he had from the beginning, even though the Christians disliked his rule.[39] The Second Anglo-Mysore War began in 1780 and led to Hyder's death on 7 December 1782, at Arcot. Afterwards the British recaptured the fort at Mangalore.[40]

Tipu Sultan succeeded his father at the age of 31.[41] He had also taken part in the conquest of Mangalore in 1768, and accused the Mangalorean Catholics of treachery towards the sovereign, as well as their having helped the British. He was aware of the treatment of Canara Muslims by the Portuguese clergy, and had always resented his father's favourable policy towards the Mangalorean Catholics.[39]

The British army under Commander-in-Chief, Brigadier-General Richard Matthews, landed in Canara on 9 March 1783, and captured the Mangalore fort on the orders of the Bombay Government.[42] Many Christians were allegedly recruited into the army of General Matthews. Tipu became infuriated with the Christians of Canara for two reasons. Firstly, when French soldiers laid down their arms because of the Peace of Paris (1783) treaty, the Christians refused to fight for Tipu. Secondly, the Christians lent the sum of Rs. 330,000 to General Matthews, which led Tipu to believe that the Mangalorean Catholics were helping the British.[43]

In May 1783, General Matthews was accused of procrastination and suspended by the Bombay Government. Thereafter Colonel John Campbell received provisional command of the strategic fort of Mangalore on 5 May 1783.[44] Tipu made several assaults on the Mangalore fort up until January 1784, all of which resulted in failure.[41] Looking at the wounded embattled garrison, Colonel Campbell considered it futile to hold out any longer. He finally delivered the Mangalore fort to Tipu when the British capitulated on 30 January 1784.[41] On 11 March 1784, Tipu and the British East India Company signed the Treaty of Mangalore, thus bringing an end to the Second Anglo-Mysore War.

Historian Ahmad Saeed states that the Christians acted as spies and guided the British[45] whilst historian Praxy Fernandes points out that the Christians helped Colonel Campbell in the Mangalore fort and adjoining towns by providing them with rice, vegetables, meat, men, and money.[46] In a letter to his superiors, Colonel Campbell strongly commended the role of the Bombay Natives regiment. This was led by a native major named Francis Pinto who put up a brave defence of the fort. He also refers to these troops as the "Native Christians".[47] Fernandes further points out that the Christians had entered into a league with Mysore traitors Kasim Ali and Mohammed Ali, who were enemies of Tipu, and had plotted with the English to overthrow him. He also states that the Head of the Congregation of Monte Mariano Church at Farangipet, near Mangalore, provided the British garrison with 1,000 bags of rice.[48]

Severine Silva points out that the Christians of Canara were eager to get rid of Tipu.[49][50] The History of the Diocese of Mangalore by J. Moore and Angelus Francis Xavier Maffei also purports to show that the Christians of Canara were charged with assisting the British during the Second Anglo-Mysore War.[51] Tipu made a number of accusations against the Christians, including that they had invited the British to invade Canara in 1781–82, furnished supplies to and otherwise assisted General Matthews' army when it landed and took possession of Onore, accompanied the British detachment to Mangalore, provided it with supplies both before and after the march, aided the British in repairing breaches made when the fort was besieged by Tipu and plundered the state treasury at Nuggur when that fortress fell to General Matthews.[47]

After receiving highly exaggerated reports about the role of the Christians and their help to the British during the Second Anglo-Mysore War,[49] Tipu decided to minimise the threat to his kingdom from the British and banish the Christians of Canara.[50] According to Severine Silva, this decision was the logical outcome of the plans he had nurtured since the time of the conquest of Mangalore with his father Hyder in 1768.[52]

It is generally believed that the propaganda of the Goan priests and the alliance of the Christians with the English cause Tipu to banish the community from Canara. The main political reason for this decision was Tipu's belief that if he banished the Christians, he could keep the British at bay.[53] However, Alan Machado Prabhu dismisses the idea of large-scale Christian support for the British during the Second Mangalore War as a myth which is not based on any concrete evidence.[54]

Prabhu states that the charge that the Christians constituted a united front cannot be sustained. Apart from divergent viewpoints among the Christian community at the time, he argues that difficulties in communication for a minority Christian population spread over a 300 km (190 mi) forested coastline broken by numerous streams and rivers, would have made united action practically impossible.[55] He further states that the majority of Mangalorean Catholics were agriculturists farming land capable of growing three crops a year. The idea of neglecting their fields in the cause of a small band of British isolated in the confines of a fort besieged by a large Mysorean army would have sounded insane. Even if the British had made promises, they would have had little effect on the militarily inexperienced Christians, who would then have had to fight a large and well-trained army in support of a beleaguered army which was not even successful.[55]

On the basis of Colonel Campbell's letter, Prabhu concludes that the "Native Christian" soldiers present in the fort were probably all East Indian infantry and artillery experts, belonging to the Bombay Natives.[47] He believes that at best, any assistance was of a limited nature and restricted to purely individual enterprise.[54] Prabhu points out that European troops, both English and French, including those from Tipu's own mercenaries, did receive some assistance although this was more humanitarian than military.[56] He also states that claim of the Christians paying the British Rs. 330,000 is an utter fabrication. To make his point, Prabhu points out that the annual revenue of the Portuguese province of Goa itself amounted to over three to four lakh rupees. Payment of the huge sum claimed by Tipu would have required a large number of wealthy donors—which the Mangalorean Catholics were not.[57]

"We instantly directed the Divan of the Havur Kutchery to prepare a list of houses occupied by Christians, taking care not to omit a single habitation. After a detailed plan was made, we stationed an officer and soldiers in every place inhabited by Christians, signifying to them that at certain time they would receive orders that they would carry out in full effect.... On the morning of a specific day, (Ash Wednesday 24 February 1784) at the hour of Morning Prayer, let all Christians be made prisoner and dispatched to our presence. Accordingly all orders were everywhere opened at the same moment and at the same hour, namely that of the Morning Prayer."

Soon after Tipu gained possession of Mangalore in January 1784, he issued orders for the seizure of the Christians in Canara, confiscation of their estates, and their subsequent deportation to his capital at Seringapatam along the Jamalabad fort route.[58] Tipu expelled the 13 Goan priests from his kingdom.[59] They were issued with orders of expulsion to Goa, fined Rs. 200,000, and threatened with death by hanging if they ever returned.[60] He also banished Fr. Joachim Miranda, a close friend of his father Hyder Ali.[60] In a letter to the Portuguese Government, Tipu wrote that he had commuted the priests' sentences of capital punishment and ordered a fine of 30 million rupees instead.[60] According to a report of 1784, Tipu had driven 26 missionaries out of his state, three of whom secretly went to join the captives.[60] Two died en route and one was killed by a soldier.[60] The missionaries were warned that they faced the death penalty if they re-entered Tipu's kingdom.[60]

On 24 February 1784, (Ash Wednesday), in a secret and well planned move, Tipu arrested a large number of Christians across the province of Canara and other parts of his kingdom.[61] Accounts of the number of captives range from 30,000 to 80,000.[62] According to historian Kranti Farias, all arrests may not have been made on a single day, but instead carried out in stages.[63]

When Tipu issued his orders to seize the Christians, the British, who had entered into a treaty with him on 11 March 1784, were helpless. Captives also included Malayali Christians, and Tamil Christians from the Tamil-countries.[64] The Portuguese, guardians of the Christian faith in Canara, intervened and requested Tipu not to imprison the priests. They suggested that he let the Christians live peacefully as his father Hyder Ali had done. But Tipu paid no heed to their request.[65] Estimates suggest that about 7,000 people remained in hiding.[66] Many were actively assisted by the Hindus whilst the few Christians in Canara who escaped Tipu's initial captivity fled to Coorg and Malabar, where they were protected by the native rulers.[66]

On Tipu's orders, all estates and properties of the Christians were seized, and distributed among his soldiers. Churches and historical records were also destroyed.[58] The seizures were so sudden that the Christians had no time to prepare for their departure or to dispose of what little property they possessed.[72] The value of property confiscated is estimated by Fr. Angelus Francis Xavier Maffei, an Italian Jesuit, at Rs. 500,000.[73]

Tipu then ordered the destruction of all 27 churches in Canara.[74] According to oral tradition, the Idgah mosque in Mangalore was constructed with stones from the destroyed Milagres Church.[75] Other Christian establishments that were spared were converted to storehouses, offices, or homes for wealthy Muslims.[75] A popular fortification in Mangalore, the Sultan Battery, built in 1784 by Tipu Sultan to prevent English warships from entering the Gurupura river,[76] was constructed with stones taken from destroyed churches.[1] The bells from the demolished churches eventually found their way into a number of temples in the area.[77] After being informed of the impending roundup by a friend in Tipu's government, Fr. Joachim Miranda disbanded St. Joseph's Seminary and sent the seminarians to Verapoly, from where some proceeded to Goa while some joined the Augustinian order.[78][79]

A few buildings escaped destruction, including a small chapel at Shantigramma near Hassan, built in 1768 and said to have been saved by Tipu's Muslim officers on the pretext that it was used to store cotton.[77] Tipu also spared the Monte Mariano church at Farangipet, on account of his father's friendship with Fr. Joachim Miranda.[81]

Tipu is said to have given orders to preserve the church at Baleguli, near Ancola, in gratitude for a cure by a Christian woman while at Ancola. The Igreja da Santa Cruz (Portuguese: Church of Holy Cross) at Hosabettu was saved through the intercession of the local Jain chiefs.[77] In Seringapatam, a whole battalion of Catholics under an officer named Michael Surappa, upon hearing of Tipu's order to destroy the Seringapatam church, called their fellow soldiers to arms. Surappa, a veteran of Hyder's army, is credited with telling the assembled Christians, "I shall remain a Christian in spite of all the orders of Tipu Sultan." The church at Kirangur was spared, although the battalion gradually dispersed.[77]

According to the Barcoor Manuscript, written in Kannada by a Mangalorean Catholic from Barcoor on his return from Seringapatam, the Christians were interned in holding camps at Mangalore, Manjeshwar, Cundapore, Onore, Ancola, and Sunquerim,[69] with the more rebellious Christians brought in chains.[82] They were then forced to climb nearly 4,000 feet (1,200 m) through the dense jungles and gorges of the Western Ghat mountain ranges along two routes, one of which was along the Bantval-Belthangadi-Kulshekar-Virajpet-Coorg-Mysore route,[83][84] and the other along the Gersoppa falls (Shimoga) route.[82] On the 200 miles (320 km) journey from Mangalore to Seringapatam[85] the Christians were accompanied by three priests, who had secretly joined them despite threats of expulsion by Tipu.[60]

Trouble arose when guards began molesting captive Christian women at their first camp at Bantwal, although able-bodied captives were able to resist the guards. At the next camp at Jamalabad fort, the rebel Christian leaders were thrown down from the fort.[84] The town of "Nettrekere" or "Netterkedu" in Tulu, on the cross roads from Maripalla to Kalpane, derives its name from the large pool of blood which resulted from the execution of rebellious Mangalorean Catholics on their march to Mysore.[75]

According to a captive from Barcoor, pregnant women often gave birth en route, and their babies had to be borne bundled about them. When they rested, the infants were suspended in cradles from the branches of trees.[84] If anyone happened to die they were buried on the spot. Captives were not given any rations, and when the time came to move on, those who had not finished cooking had to leave behind their rice and the cooking pots.[86] The Barcoor Manuscript along with other British Government records suggest that 20,000 captives (one-third of the total) died on the march to Seringapatam due to hunger, disease, and ill treatment by soldiers.[84][87] The journey to Seringapatam took six weeks. By 1787, some 30,000 captives, half the original number, had perished.[88]

On arrival at Seringapatam the Christian captives were forced to embrace Islam. All those who complied were freed. Those who refused were tied to the feet of the elephants to be dragged and trampled on Tipu's orders.[86]

One English prisoner related that two risalas (regiments of soldiers) arrived daily in Seringapatam to select girls they could take as prizes to join their harems. Often when girls were seized, their young men would offer resistance and smash their dhoolies (palanquin). Officers would capture the attackers and administer five hundred strokes with whips and canes, from whose effects many men died.[89] Historian Lewin Bentham Bowring reports that, "Tipu demanded the surrender of the daughters of some of these Christians in order to have them placed in his seraglio, and that, on the refusal of their parents, the latter had their[89] noses, ears and upper lips cut off, and were paraded through the streets on asses, with their faces towards the tails of the animals."[90]

Such treatment of the Christians for refusals by the girls is also confirmed in the accounts of British officer James Scurry, who was held captive along with the Mangalorean Catholics.[91] In his book The Captivity, Sufferings, and Escape of James Scurry, who was Detained a Prisoner During Ten Years, in the Dominions of Hyder Ali and Tippoo Saib (1824), Scurry also reports that Tipu relented on his demand for captive girls, after one captive fell from her beast and expired on the spot through loss of blood.[91] About 200 young women, the prettiest and fairest, were selected for Tipu's seraglio. The rest of the women were distributed as wives to Muslim officers and favourites living there.[87] The future Christian progeny of these young girls and women were lost, and their descendants are fully Islamic as of today.[69]

As the food in the camp was sub-standard, Balthazar of Belthangadi, a Mangalorean Catholic nobleman, offered to make a chutney for the captured Mangalorean Catholics. This came to be known as the legendary "Balthazar Chutney".[92] The jemadars, subedars, and havildars meted out more an ignominious punishment to those who refused to accept Islam, slitting off their ears and noses. They were seated on asses, paraded through the city, and thrown into the dungeons of Seringapatam.[86] Able-bodied young Christian men were drafted into the army after being circumcised and converted to Islam.[54]

The Barcoor Manuscript records, "On four occasions the young able-bodied Christian men were thus drafted for the Army. Some of them were appointed jemadars, subedars, and havildars. The Sircar supplied them with ghee, butter, curds, firewood, etc. One hundred men were formed into one company, four companies into a risala, four risalas into a sufedar, and four sufedars were placed under a bakshi. Out of every company twenty-five men were taken and circumcised at the end of every month. When the wounds were healed, another twenty-five were taken and circumcised, and so on, until the whole company was initiated into Islamism."[54]

British general Kirkpatrick arrives at a figure of 15,000 young men capable of bearing arms, formed into 30 risalas.[54] They were drafted into the Ahmedy Corps in 1785 and went on to serve in Tipu's campaigns against the Marathas, the Nizam, and the British during 1786 and 1787. Casualties were heavy and only a few survived captivity.[84]

Those who remained, such as the lame, the blind and the aged, employed themselves in cultivating the land and doing other manual work. Many were made to carry baskets filled with gobra (cowdung) for three days as a public warning to others. The stubborn Christians were given the most menial tasks, and made to work in the paddy fields. They were underfed, and immediately imprisoned for fighting. Completely isolated from any women, the idea was for the captive men to die of old age without creating any progeny.[93]

Tipu appointed some Christian captives to posts in his household. He made Salu (Salvadore) Pinto Deputy Vizier and Anthony Gagialgar (clockmaker) Saldanha House Chamberlain.[84] One of his most faithful servants, a Mangalorean Catholic named Manuel Mendes, saved Tipu's life in Travancore when he donned his master's robes and sat in his palanquin. Tipu escaped in the general panic whilst Mendes was captured and killed by the Nairs, who mistook him for Tipu.[94]

In 1785, after declaring the Coorgis guilty of polyandry, Tipu seized nearly 70,000 Hindus of Coorg along with their king, Dodda Vira Rajendra, and held them captive at Seringapatam. They were also forcibly converted to Islam and received the same harsh treatment as the Mangalorean Catholics.[95] From 1786 until 1789, even the Nairs of Malabar were captured and deported to Seringapatam.[96]

By 1787, half of the Christians had perished through disease and starvation. Tipu attempted to preach to the remaining Christians in Canara, and took them into custody.[66] As the Christians settled down in Seringapatam, they slowly reorganised themselves with the elders forming a secret group named the "Council of Ten", to help keep their faith alive.[93] According to Balthazar of Belthangadi, in the "Council of Ten", the Christians met from time to time to deliberate on issues concerning the community. In 1789, one of his officers informed him of the group and Tipu thereafter banned any political gatherings of Christians.[97]

The Christians, believing that this tribulation came upon them for their neglect of the Law of God and their religious duties, began to fervently read the Krista Purana, an epic poem on the life of Jesus Christ written by the English Jesuit Thomas Stephens (1549–1619). On discovering this, some Muslims destroyed the books, but the Christians constructed subterranean refuges in which to perform their religious devotions, read the books, and strengthen their faith.[87] According to Mr. Silva of Gangollim, a survivor of the captivity, if a person who had escaped from Seringapatam was found, the punishment ordered by Tipu was amputation of the ears, nose, feet and one hand.[98]

Several thousand Christians in the dominion of Tipu Sultan had often in past years represented to him the discomfort attending the due exercise of their religion. He had hitherto paid no manner of regard to their supplications. Nevertheless, the present state of affairs in his extensive empire had inclined his heart to mercy and not to harshness. Wherefore he had dispatched these his trusty messengers who might convey the words of his mouth in all variety, begging the Governor and the Archbishop not to refuse every needful exertion towards succoring their brethren Christians according to the obligations of their religion. And he would as soon as might be convenient rebuild at his own expense the Churches that the fate decreed agents of destruction had levelled to the ground.

Reports by Joachim Miranda and the Portuguese Government confirm that the Christians were forcibly circumcised and converted to Islam. These Christians then openly practised Islam.[99] Some writers hold the view that the Christians did not voluntary submit to these conversions.[100] Other Christian missionaries also appealed to the Roman Catholic Church to intervene on behalf of the captive Christians. A priest also wrote a letter to the Holy See to put pressure on Tipu to allow the priests.[101]

When Tipu's embassy visited the court of the French King Louis XVI in 1788, Pope Clement XIV's representative conveyed the appeal to the embassy. In the Third Anglo-Mysore War (1789–1792), the British and their allies defeated Tipu. Desperate to break the alliance of powers surrounding him on all sides, Tipu sought to make peace with Portugal, the Marathas, and other powers.[101] According to Severine Silva, he consequently gave up the persecution of Christians, opened negotiations with the Portuguese Government and with the Archbishop of Goa, with a promise that he would stop molesting the Christians, further asserting that he would rebuild all destroyed churches at his own cost.[101] The Christians found their supervision relaxed and Tipu became more conciliatory in his attitude. The Christians now escaped from the camps of Seringapatam and gradually began to enter the neighbouring kingdoms of Coorg and Malabar.[101]

At this time many Christians performed daring feats to rescue captives from Seringapatnam and take them to places of safety.[101] A captive named Domingo Pinto (brother of Salvador Pinto, who rose to high rank in the services of Tipu), was particularly proficient in this. He rescued many people and took them secretly to Mangalore or Tellicherry. He proposed that those anxious to regain their liberty could be rescued on payment to him of a certain sum of money. He fixed the rescue price per captive at 8 hoons (Rs. 32) for a male, and 4 hoons (Rs. 16) for a female.[101]

In 1792, the King of Coorg, Dodda Vira-Rajendra, managed to escape from captivity at Seringapatnam, and, with the aid of the British armies under Lord Cornwallis, was able to regain Coorg for himself through the treaty of 1792 between the English, their allies and Tipu.[102] Anxious to repopulate a kingdom depopulated by Tipu, Dodda welcomed the fugitive Konkani Christians. As an inducement to remain permanently in his territory, he granted them several privileges, obtained a priest from Goa, and built a chapel for them.[102] After the relaxation of policies from 1792 onwards, the Christians began to resettle in Canara. Many Mangalorean Catholic students, who had studied for the priesthood in Goa returned to Mangalore.[102]

After considering the changed circumstances, the Archbishop of Goa, by a provision issued on 20 February 1795, appointed Minguel José Louis Mendes interim vicar of the four sub-districts of Mangalore, Barcoor, Onore and Moolki.[102] Some other priests also came to Canara with the new vicar. Those from Goa retained their old prejudices and could not accept the rule of Tipu, openly advocating rebellion against him, writing offensive letters and making offensive speeches. As a result, in 1797, the brief repite enjoyed by the Christians ceased and their persecution recommenced.[102]

In the Battle of Seringapatam on 4 May 1799, the British army under officers George Harris, David Baird, and
Arthur Wellesley stormed the fortress, breached the town of Seringapatam, and killed Tipu.[75] After Tipu's death in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War, the Mangalorean Catholics were freed from captivity.[75] Of the 60,000–80,000 Christians taken captive, only 15,000–20,000 made it out as Christians.[103] British general Arthur Wellesley helped 10,000 of them return to Canara.[104] Of the remaining Christians freed, about a thousand went to Malabar, and some hundreds settled in Coorg.[105]

According to Francis Buchanan, 15,000 of them returned to Mangalore and its environs, whilst 10,000 of them migrated to Malabar.[106] The Gazetteer of the Bombay Presidency (1883) mentions that 15,000 persons returned, of whom 12,000 were from South Canara and 3,000 from North Canara.[107] According to the Mangalorean Catholic genealogist Michael Lobo, the present Mangalorean Catholic community is descended almost entirely from the small group of survivors who returned to South Canara.[108] Soon after the death of Tipu, a detachment from the Bombay army under Lieutenant-Colonel Wiseman took possession of Mangalore on 4 June 1799, as well as the entire province of Canara, with the exception of the fortress of Jamalabad.[109]

Thomas Munro was appointed the first collector of Canara in June 1799 and remained in the post until October 1800.[110] He was accompanied by officers John Goldsborough Ravenshaw and Alexander Reade who were to take control and reorganise the administration.[104]
Munro issued three edicts regarding Christian estates that had been taken over by non-Christians during the captivity. In determining ownership of land, he sent two Mangalorean Hindus, Muthsuddy Vencappah and Saly Purvoe Dur Shetty along with other Christians to investigate and report back to him about these estates.[111] Through the assistance of the Church, and with the support of Munro, the Christians were able to recover their lands and estates.[112]

In 1800, the British took a census of the region. Of the 396,672 people living in South Canara,[113] 10,877 were Christians residing in 2,545 houses.[114] According to the same census, in the entire province of Canara, out of the 592,000 people,[115] the Christian population was recorded as 10,877 in South Canara, and 2,380 in North Canara.[114] Padre José Miguel Luis de Mendes, a Goan Catholic priest, was appointed Vicar of Our Lady of Rosary at Mangalore on 7 December 1799. He took a lot of interest in the re-establishment of the community from 1799 to 1808.[116] Later, John Goldsborough Ravenshaw was appointed collector of South Canara, whilst Alexander Reade became collector of North Canara.[104] Ravenshaw took an active part in the re-establishment of their former possessions and recovery of their estates. He constructed a church for them, which was completed in 1806.[117] Churches destroyed by Tipu were rebuilt by the Christians.[118]

After relocation, the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Goa recommenced.[116] The Christian population almost doubled in 1818 when their total in North and South Canara was estimated to be 21,280 out of a total population of 670,355.[119]
According to various parish books dating to the time, Mangalorean Catholics numbered 19,068 in South Canara (12,877 in Mangalore and Bantval,[68] 3,918 in Moolki, 2,273 in Cundapore and Barcoor),[120] whilst Christians in North Canara numbered 2,749 (1,878 in Onore, 599 in Ancola, and 272 in Sunquerim).[120] Before long the Mangalorean Catholics became a prosperous and influential community consisting mainly of planters, tile manufacturers, and agriculturists. They also competed with the local Brahmins for offices in the services of the British, under whose rule the community prospered.[118]

Many Roman Catholic and British writers have severely criticised Tipu for his policies and treatment of Christians. British general Kirkpatrick referred to Tipu as, "the intolerant bigot and the furious fanatic."[122] British Colonel Mark Wilks in his Historical Sketches of the South of India, cites an account in which Tipu mentions that, "the cause arose from the rage of Islam began to boil in his breast when informed of the circumstances of the spread of Christianity in Goa and Canara."[123]

According to historian Thomas Paul, Tipu shifted his hatred for the British to the Mangalorean Catholics and other South Indian Christian communities.[64] Sita Ram Goel mentions that Tipu's justification for the conversion was that during the Portuguese domination, many Muslims were forcibly converted to Christianity. Tipu proclaimed his actions as a punishment for the conversion of Muslims to Christianity.[124]

According to historian Alan Machado Prabhu, Tipu's reasons for the captivity were primarily religious. He found the social customs of the Christians distasteful, such as their fondness for pork and the social acceptance of alcohol. Tipu therefore saw them as a community deserving of his religious zeal as a Padishah. As evidence of this, Prabhu states that Tipu does not mention a large scale Christian conspiracy in his writings in the Sultan-ul-Tawarikh, where he justifies his action instead as arising from the "rage of Islam that began to boil in his breast."[125]

Prabhu further asserts that Tipu's hatred of Christians was compounded by fears that as they shared the same faith as their European co-religionists, the Christians were viewed as a potential fifth column in the event of a British offensive into his territories.[126] To this, he adds that Tipu also had future territorial ambitions in Goa and wanted to rid himself of any potential dissent from the Christians within his domain.[54] Therefore, according to Prabhu, through coerced confessions of prominent Mangalorean Catholics, Tipu fabricated evidence of a large-scale Christian conspiracy against him, even though he knew it wasn't true.[47]

Contemporary scholars like Surendranath Sen, Mohibbul Hasan, N. K. Sinha, and B. Sheik Ali, who have analysed Tipu's religious policies on Christians, conclude that he was not a religious bigot.[121] They argue that forcible conversions to Islam were done purely for political, not religious reasons. Forced conversions were carried out as a punishment for Christians who supported the British against their own native suzerain. The conversions came after many warnings by Tippu.[121]

More than a century after the Captivity ended, Jerome Saldanha, a Mangalorean Catholic historian and civil servant during the British Raj at the Bombay Presidency, wrote an article in Mangalore Magazine, published by St. Aloysius College, which chronicled contemporary developments and views from the closing decades of the 19th century:[127]

People of all classes belonging to Canara, especially the Christians, had suffered so dreadfully from Tipu's regime of terror that they welcomed the British with a sense of relief and joy, and a hope of future peace and prosperity, that perhaps nowhere else was felt in India on the advent of the British. Nor were our ancestors disappointed, for they found that the main object of British rule in India was to secure the happiness of the people over whom it was held.
Thirty years after the event the apparent lack of resistance from the Christian captives drew criticism from the French priest Abbe Dubois. In one of his letters dated 1815,[128] Dubois commented, "not a single individual among so many thousands had courage enough to confess his faith under this trying circumstance, and become a martyr to his religion."[129] Various writers have concluded that the acceptance and practise of Islam by the Christians amounted to partial apostasy.[100]

During the mid-19th century, Victor Fernandes, Bishop of Mangalore (1931–1955), erected a large cross on the former outskirts of Mangalore in Nanthoor near the Padav hills in honour of the memory of those Mangalorean Catholics who died on the march to Seringapatam during the Captivity.[83] The bicentenary of the release from captivity was widely celebrated on 4 May 1999 by the Mangalorean Catholic community. Five Catholics walked from Seringapatam to Mangalore to retrace the 278-kilometre (173 mi) route that Tipu Sultan forced the Christians to follow in 1784. The commemorative march ended on 11 May at the Rosario Cathedral, Mangalore.[130]

The treatment of the prisoners of Tippu Sultan's Coorg and Mangalore campaigns is recorded in the Arabic and Farsi inscriptions on the south wall of the mosque at Seringapatam, dated 1787 AD.[131][non-primary source needed]

Now followed the fate of the poor[132] Malabar Christians,[b] of which I shall consider myself the innocent cause, in reading what was written by General Mathews, as stated in the preceding note. Their country was invested by Tippu's army, and they were driven men, women and children to the number of 30,000 to Sirangapatam where all who were fit to carry arms were circumcised and forwarded into four battalions. The sufferings of these poor creatures were most excruciating: one circumstance which came under my immediate notice, I will attempt to describe: when recovered they were armed and drilled, and ordered to Mysore, nine miles from the capital, but for what purpose we could not learn. Their daughters were many of them beautiful girls; and Tippu was determined to have them for his seraglio;[67] but this they refused; and Mysore was invested by his orders, and the four battalions were disarmed and brought prisoners to Sirangapatam. This being done, the officers tied their hands behind them. The Chambars or Sandalmakers were then sent for and their noses ears and upper lips were cut off. They were then mounted on asses, their faces towards the tail and led through Patan, with a wretch before them proclaiming their crime. One fell from his beast and expired on the spot through loss of blood. Such a mangled and bloody scene excited the compassion of numbers and our hearts were ready to burst at the inhuman sight. It was reported that Tippu relented in this case, and I rather think it true, as he never gave any further orders respecting their women. The[91] twenty-six that survived were sent to his different arsenals where after the lapse of a few years I saw several of them lingering out a most miserable existence.[133]

22 November 1904.

My dear Sister,


Though you are so old, I have not yet told you what our beloved grandfather did and what he suffered. I am now narrating to you what he told me in almost the same words. They were seven brothers and one sister. The sister died at an early age. She was buried by putting on the clothes which are seen on pictures of angels. All the brothers were much grieved at the sad loss.... After this, a rakshasa[c] by name Tipu Sultan seized all the Christians from Sadashivgad to Coorg and marched them to Pattana. My grandfather and all his brothers also were taken by the sepoys. Only because grandfather's father and mother were too old and weak, they were left behind. All these seven were imprisoned. For many days they were confined to different rooms separated from one another. Sometimes they were taken out. They suffered much because they were not given food. If they were given one handful of ragi flour, they were not given salt or anything else. Even this ragi flour was given occasionally. There was nothing to dress and nothing to cover in the night. With such afflictions, six brothers died. My grandfather, while he was allowed to go out for a while, used to eat leaves or pieces of leather if available, because he could not sustain the pangs of hunger. But he used to recite the Rosary daily, with the rosary in hand. One day when the grandfather was brought out along with or by (illegible) he disappeared without the knowledge of anybody into a bamboo bush. The sepoys had not seen him. There were thousands of people; and there were the solemnities of the Moharrum festival. Taking this opportunity, grandfather concealed himself. Then the sepoys took all the people inside and closed the gates of the town. At that time my grandfather was eight years old. If a person who had escaped was found, the punishment under the orders of Tippu was the cutting off of the ears, nose, the feet and one hand. The meting out of this punishment was seen by him; and he was much afraid that if he was caught he would be punished similarly. He began reciting the Rosary and praying that he should not be a victim to such punishment, this boy of eight years got out of the bush and began to run. To come home was a question of many days. He looked to and from on the road and very carefully too. The sight of any man even at a great distance was enough to drive him into the dense jungle to take shelter in some bush. He suffered much for want of rice. He lived on leaves and whatever he found in the jungle. While he was in this weak and lingering condition, one day he met a sepoy, who caught him and took him with him. There was no other alternative but to follow the sepoy. While he was in this plight and waling on the road of a place known as Asthari, he was given a severe blow on the head by the sepoy. Immediately, grandfather fell down senseless. The sepoy left him there thinking that he was dead, and walked away. After a long time, he recovered his senses. Yet his head was reeling and was very weak. Then the fright that if caught again, he would be taken back, forced him to remain in a jungle. Days and nights he passed in jungles. One day, he met two cartmen of his acquaintance going to the house of their relations. They recognised grandfather and treated him affectionately and took him to their relations and gave him food. The food consisted of bakri[d], curry of eggs and rice. Praising the Lord, he took the food which he craved for a long time. Later, by the grace of God, this boy returned to the house of his parents. 'Out of the seven brothers, this was the only one who returned alive,' so saying, his aged parents clasped him. After this he was educated and later he became an important man; he rendered assistance to several priests who loved him. He remained amidst them assisting them in all their needs. He was engaged to a girl in Goa. The girl belonged to a good family and was given a large dowry. Her name was Anna Maria Rodricks. The marriage was duly celebrated. There are many priests in that family.
a ^ The Memorial of 15 May 1860, was addressed by the Catholics of Mangalore to Mons. Bonnand of Pondicherry, who had then been appointed as the Apostolic Visitator by the Holy See.[136]
b ^  "Malabar Christians" is a possible misinterpretation by James Scurry. The term actually refers to the Christians of Canara.
c ^ Rakshasa is the Kannada word for demon or monster.
d ^ Bakri is a flatbread made of rice and grated coconut.Characters of Shakespear's Plays is an 1817 book of criticism of Shakespeare's plays, written by early nineteenth century English essayist and literary critic William Hazlitt. Composed in reaction to the neoclassical approach to Shakespeare's plays typified by Samuel Johnson, it was among the first English-language studies of Shakespeare's plays to follow the manner of German critic August Wilhelm Schlegel, and, with the work of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, paved the way for the increased appreciation of Shakespeare's genius that was characteristic of later nineteenth-century criticism. It was also the first book to cover all of Shakespeare's plays, intended as a guide for the general reader.

Then becoming known as a theatre critic, Hazlitt had been focusing increasingly on drama as literature, contributing miscellaneous literary criticism to various journals, including the prestigious Edinburgh Review. This was the first of his book-length literary studies. The plays, the thirty-five that Hazlitt considered to be genuine, are covered in thirty-two chapters, with new material added to passages reworked from periodical articles and reviews. A Preface establishes his main theme of the uniqueness of Shakespeare's characters and looks back at earlier Shakespearean criticism. Two concluding chapters on "Doubtful Plays of Shakespear" and the "Poems and Sonnets" round out the book.

The centre of attention is in large part on the characters, described often with a personal slant and using memorable expressions ("It is we who are Hamlet") and incorporating psychological insights that were to become highly influential in later criticism. Though at first less influential, Hazlitt's comments on the plays' dramatic structure and poetry and on the central themes and general mood of each play laid the groundwork for later critics' more elaborate interpretations. Frequently expressing the view that stage presentation could not do justice to Shakespeare's plays, Hazlitt nevertheless also found certain plays eminently actable, and he frequently admired the performances of certain actors, particularly Edmund Kean.

At first highly acclaimed—it made an immediate and powerful impact on the poet John Keats, among others—then brutally criticised, Hazlitt's book lost much of its influence in the author's lifetime, only to re-enter the mainstream of Shakespearean criticism in the late nineteenth century. The first edition sold out quickly; sales of the second, in mid-1818, were at first brisk, but they ceased entirely in the wake of harshly antagonistic, personally directed, politically motivated reviews in the Tory literary magazines of the day. Although some interest continued to be shown in Hazlitt's work as an essayist, it was not until the end of the nineteenth century, long after Hazlitt's death, that significant interest was again shown in his interpretations of Shakespeare. In the twentieth century, the influential critic A.C. Bradley and a few others began to take seriously the book's interpretations of many of Shakespeare's characters. But then Hazlitt along with Bradley was censured for displaying faults of the "character" school of Shakespearean criticism, primarily that of discussing dramatic characters as though they were real people, and again Hazlitt's contributions to Shakespearean criticism were deprecated.

A revival of interest in Hazlitt, as a thinker, began in the mid-20th century. His thoughts on Shakespeare's plays as a whole (particularly the tragedies), his discussions of certain characters such as Shylock, Falstaff, Imogen, Caliban and Iago and his ideas about the nature of drama and poetry in general, such as expressed in the essay on Coriolanus, gained renewed appreciation and influenced other Shakespearean criticism.

Hazlitt's ideas about many of the plays have now come to be valued as thought-provoking alternatives to those of his contemporary Coleridge, and Characters of Shakespear's Plays is now viewed as a major study of Shakespeare's plays, placing Hazlitt with Schlegel and Coleridge as one of the three most notable Shakespearean critics of the Romantic period.

On 26 January 1814, Edmund Kean debuted as Shylock in Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice at London's Drury Lane theatre. William Hazlitt, drama critic for the Morning Chronicle since the previous September, was in the audience. He wrote a stunning review,[1] followed by several others applauding (but sometimes censuring)[2] Kean's performances in other Shakespearean tragedies, including King Richard II, King Richard III, Hamlet, Macbeth, Romeo and Juliet, and, what Hazlitt considered the best of Kean's performances, Othello.[3] (These were written for the Morning Chronicle, the Champion, and the Examiner; he was to continue as principal drama critic for the last of these for three years.)[4] Kean was hitherto unknown in London. Hazlitt, having recently begun a career as a theatrical reviewer, was no better known than the subject of his reviews. These notices quickly brought both Kean and Hazlitt before the public eye.[5]

In the course of his preparing for a drama review, Hazlitt was in the habit of reading or rereading the play he was soon to see,[6] and his reviews came to include extensive commentary on the plays themselves, turning rapidly from dramatic criticism to literary criticism.[7] With Shakespeare in particular, this led to considerations of the ways in which the actors—again, particularly his favourite Kean—communicated the message of the plays. But he also noted ways in which no actor's interpretation could live up to the dramatist's conception.[8]

As his musings developed along these lines, Hazlitt continued to contribute miscellaneous articles to various periodicals.[9] In February 1816, he reviewed August Wilhelm Schlegel's Lectures on Dramatic Literature for the Edinburgh Review. The German critic Schlegel showed an appreciation for Shakespeare of a kind that no one in Hazlitt's country had yet demonstrated, and Hazlitt, sympathising with many of Schlegel's ideas, felt there was a place for a whole book that would provide appreciative criticism of all of Shakespeare's plays. Such a book would provide liberal quotations from the text, and focus on the characters and various qualities particular to each play; and he felt that he could write it.[10] His writing career was now moving in this direction (he had been contributing miscellaneous literary criticism to the Examiner and elsewhere during this period), he needed the money to support his family,[11] and his growing reputation as a drama critic enabled him to have his name appear on the title page (as a reviewer for periodicals, his contributions were anonymous, as was customary at the time).[8]

Thus, Characters of Shakespear's Plays was born. Considerable material that he had already worked up in his drama reviews was incorporated into the book. One essay, on A Midsummer Night's Dream, was taken entire from a contribution to "The Round Table" series in the Examiner, first published on 26 November 1815, with a concluding paragraph tacked on from a drama review, also published in the Examiner, on 21 January 1816. There was material from other essays. Most of "Shakespear's Exact Discrimination of Nearly Similar Characters" (the Examiner, 12 May 1816) made its way into the chapters on King Henry IV, King Henry VI, and Othello.[12] Portions of "Shakespear's Female Characters" (the Examiner, 28 July 1816) found a place in the chapters on Cymbeline and Othello.[13] Hazlitt filled out the rest of what he needed to make a complete book in 1816 and possibly early 1817.[14]

At this time, unhappy with the way his collection The Round Table, issued in the same year, was being promoted by its publisher, he began to promote his new book himself, partly by word of mouth and also by getting a friend to publish the chapter on Hamlet in The Times and requesting Francis Jeffrey, editor of the Edinburgh Review, to notice it in that periodical.[15] He had already had it printed privately (instead of offering it directly to a publisher) by his friend the printer Carew Henry Reynell, who purchased the copyright for £100. As a publicity tactic, copies were circulated privately. Finally, Hazlitt got the book published, by Rowland Hunter and the brothers Charles and James Ollier in collaboration, who brought it out on 9 July 1817.[15] It was extremely successful, this first edition selling out in six weeks. A second edition was issued by Taylor and Hessey in 1818,[16] and later that year an unlicensed edition was brought out in Boston by Wells and Lilly.[17] No further editions appeared in Hazlitt's lifetime.[18]

Characters of Shakespear's Plays consists primarily of Hazlitt's impressions of and thoughts about all of William Shakespeare's plays he believed to be genuine.[19] It was the first book of the kind that anyone had yet written.[20] His main focus is on the characters that appear in the plays, but he also comments on the plays' dramatic structure and poetry,[21] referring frequently to commentary by earlier critics, as well as the manner in which the characters were acted on stage. The essays on the plays themselves (there is a "Preface" as well as an essay on "Doubtful Plays of Shakespear" and one on the "Poems and Sonnets") number thirty-two, but with two of the essays encompassing five of the plays, the plays discussed amount to thirty-five in number. Though each essay constitutes a chapter in a book, in style and length they resemble those of Hazlitt's miscellaneous collection The Round Table (published also in 1817, a collaboration with Leigh Hunt),[22] which followed the model for periodical essays established a century earlier in The Spectator.[11]

Though Hazlitt could find much to appreciate in the comedies, tragedy was to him inherently more important, and he weights the tragedies much more heavily.[23] In this he differed from Johnson, who thought Shakespeare best at comedy. The greatest of the plays were tragedies—particularly Macbeth, Othello, King Lear, and Hamlet—and Hazlitt's comments on tragedy are often integrated with his ideas about the significance of poetry and imaginative literature in general.[24] As he expressed it at the end of "Lear", tragedy describes the strongest passions, and "the greatest strength of genius is shewn here in describing the strongest passions: for the power of the imagination, in works of invention, must be in proportion to the force of the natural impressions, which are the subject of them."[25]

In the "Preface" Hazlitt establishes his focus on "characters" by quoting Pope's comment that "every single character in Shakespear, is as much an individual, as those in life itself".[26] After reviewing various other critics of Shakespeare, Hazlitt focuses on two of the most important, including the influential Dr. Johnson. Hazlitt found the Shakespearean criticism of Johnson, the premier literary critic of the previous era, troubling in several ways. He insufficiently valued the tragedies; he missed the essence of much of the poetry; and he "reduced everything to the common standard of conventional propriety [...] the most exquisite refinement or sublimity produced an effect on his mind, only as they could be translated into the language of measured prose".[27] Johnson also believed that every character in Shakespeare represents a "type" or "species",[22] whereas Hazlitt, siding with Pope, emphasised the individuality of Shakespeare's characters, while discussing them more comprehensively than anyone had yet done.

Rather than an English critic, it was the German August Wilhelm Schlegel, whose lectures on the drama had recently been translated into English, whom Hazlitt believed to be the greatest critic of Shakespeare's plays. Hazlitt here includes long extracts from Schlegel on Shakespeare, differing with him principally with respect to what he called a "mysticism" that appears in Schlegel's interpretations. He shared with Schlegel an enthusiasm for Shakespeare that he found lacking in Dr. Johnson. "An overstrained enthusiasm", he remarks, "is more pardonable with respect to Shakespear than the want of it; for our admiration cannot easily surpass his genius."[28]

As one of his favourites,[29] Hazlitt places Cymbeline first in his discussions of Shakespeare's plays, according it extensive treatment. This includes his personal impressions of individual characters—as the book's title would lead us to expect—but also the kind of broader consideration for which he would not be credited for at least a century and a half.[30]

The play's "greatest charm is the character of Imogen", writes Hazlitt.[31] He observes how, in justifying her actions, "she relies little on her personal charms"[32] or a prudish "affected antipathy to vice"[33] but rather "on her merit, and her merit is in the depth of her love, her truth and constancy."[32] Shakespeare's presentation is full and rounded. We see her beauty as observed by others (as by the villain Iachimo),[34] but more often we see her from the inside, and are touched when, after endless nights of crying herself awake over the loss of Posthumus, she is outraged to learn (as she is falsely informed) that "'Some Jay of Italy [...] hath betrayed him.'"[35] And we witness a moment in the development of her character, as her resolve to disguise herself to seek out Posthumus grows firmer.[36] "Of all Shakespear's women she is perhaps the most tender and most artless."[37]

Hazlitt broadens the scope of these reflections into a consideration of "Shakespear's heroines" in general, writing, "No one ever hit the true perfection of the female character, the sense of weakness leaning on the strength of its affections for support, so well as Shakespear".[31] (Here Hazlitt incorporates material from his essay "Shakespear's Female Characters", published in the Examiner on 28 July 1816.)[38]

Hazlitt comments to a lesser degree on other characters, such as Bellarius, Guiderius, and Arviragus; more often he shows how the characters relate to each other and to the structure of the play. These three, for example, "are a fine relief to the intrigues and artificial refinements of the court from which they are banished."[39]

The character of Cloten, "the conceited, booby lord", is discussed as an occasion for noting how Shakespeare depicted what is most contradictory in human nature. Cloten, "with all the absurdity of his person and manners, is not without shrewdness in his observations."[40] And again Hazlitt steps back and points out how Shakespeare set one character off against the other and presented characters of similar types but with slight modifications of their otherwise similar traits to convey a certain impression about human nature. Hazlitt observes:

[A]s it happens in most of the author's works, there is not only the utmost keeping in each separate character; but in the casting of the different parts, and their relation to one another, there is an affinity and harmony, like what we may observe in the gradations of colour in a picture. The striking and powerful contrasts in which Shakespear abounds could not escape observation; but the use he makes of the principle of analogy to reconcile the greatest diversities of character and to maintain a continuity of feeling throughout, has not been sufficiently attended to.[41]

As he does with character, Hazlitt observes patterns he discovers in the plot. He will have nothing of criticising it in terms of the classical "unities".[42] The plot must be taken on its own terms. If the action is long-drawn-out, "the interest becomes more aerial and refined from the principle of perspective introduced into the subject by the imaginary changes of scene, as well as by the length of time it occupies."[43]

Regarding Shakespeare's weaving together of the story's threads, Hazlitt marvels at the "ease and conscious unconcern" with which "[t]he most straggling and seemingly casual incidents are contrived [and] in such a manner as to lead at last to the most complete developement of the catastrophe."[44] Again, he broadens the discussion and argues against the view of Dr. Johnson "that Shakespear was generally inattentive to the winding-up of his plots. We think the contrary is true; and we might cite in proof of this remark not only the present play, but the conclusion of Lear, of Romeo and Juliet, of Macbeth, of Othello, even of Hamlet, and of other plays of less moment, in which the last act is crowded with decisive events brought about by natural means."[44]

Beyond plot, beyond individual characters, Hazlitt rounds out his discussion by noting the prevailing mood, the "tender gloom [that] overspreads the whole" play.[31] He sees the parallel yet subtly contrasting lines of the story playing against each other "unconsciously" in the mind of the reader as of the author, working by "the force of natural association, a particular train of thought suggesting different inflections of the same predominant feeling, melting into, and strengthening one another, like chords in music."[45] Thus, far more than simply commenting on particular characters, Hazlitt elucidates the character of the play as a whole.[46]

Hazlitt's focus in the essay on Coriolanus is less on the various characters of Shakespeare's tragedy than on the fundamental moral and political principles behind their actions. For Hazlitt, this play showed in action the concepts behind political writings of his own day, such as Edmund Burke's Reflections on the Revolution in France and Thomas Paine's Rights of Man.[47] The character of Coriolanus is a type of the aristocratic hero, though presented as a well-rounded individual, with a "pride" consisting of "inflexible sternness of will", a "love of reputation" and "glory", and a "contempt of popular opinion".[47] Hazlitt also comments on the characters of Coriolanus's mother and wife, and he points out the substantial fidelity of this play to its source in Thomas North's translation of Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans, extracting long passages from the life of Coriolanus.[48]

His primary focus, however, is on Shakespeare's dramatisation of "the arguments for and against aristocracy or democracy, on the privileges of the few and the claims of many".[47] Shakespeare shows the weaknesses of both the nobles and the people, but, thought Hazlitt, he was biased somewhat in favour of the nobility, leading him to gloss over their defects more so than those of the common people.[49]

But Hazlitt goes further, to develop an idea that only much later was seen to have radical implications for literary theory: he claims that it is of the very nature of poetry to glorify the aristocrat, the solitary hero, and the monarch, while being much less suited to represent, in ways that capture the imagination, the social problems of the common people.[50] Poetic "imagination naturally falls in with the language of power. The imagination is an exaggerating and exclusive faculty: it takes from one thing to add to another: it accumulates circumstances together to give the greatest possible effect to a favourite object."[51] On the other hand, the language that would be used to argue the cause of the people relies more on "the understanding", which "is a dividing and measuring faculty: it judges of things not according to their immediate impression on the mind, but according to their relations to one another. [...] Poetry [on the other hand] is right-royal. It puts the individual for the species, the one above the infinite many, might before right."[52]

"So we feel some concern for the poor citizens of Rome when they meet together to compare their wants and grievances, till Coriolanus comes in and with blows and big words drives this set of 'poor rats,' this rascal scum, to their homes and beggary before him. There is nothing heroical in a multitude of miserable rogues not wishing to be starved [...] but when a single man comes forward to brave their cries and to make them submit to the last indignities, from mere pride and self-will, our admiration of his prowess is immediately converted into contempt for their pusillanimity."[53] The key for Hazlitt is the innate human "love of power". This love of power is not necessarily expressed by a will to dominate others physically; but there is at least the tendency to side with power in the imagination, to be swayed and carried away emotionally by the power of poetic language. Hazlitt's own worship of Napoleon, it was later observed, could be taken as an example of this tendency.[54]

Hazlitt for the most part agreed with his contemporary Romantics that poetry can make us better human beings. The following year, in his Lectures on the English Poets, referring to tragic poetry especially, he would observe how "in proportion as it sharpens the edge of calamity and disappointment, it strengthens the desire of good."[55] Yet, he remained alert to ways in which poetry can also express and reinforce our less admirable tendencies. Following an observation of Burke he notes that "people flock to see a tragedy; but if there were a public execution in the next street, the theatre would very soon be empty. [...] We are [...] fond of indulging our violent passions [....] We cannot help it. The sense of power is as strong a principle in the mind as the love of pleasure."[56]

Alarmingly, this tendency, as shown in Coriolanus, could seem to so glorify tyranny and oppression as to lead people to accept it in practice:

The whole dramatic moral of Coriolanus is that those who have little shall have less, and that those who have much shall take all that others have left. The people are poor; therefore they ought to be starved. They are slaves; therefore they ought to be beaten. They work hard; therefore they ought to be treated like beasts of burden. They are ignorant; therefore they ought not to be allowed to feel that they want food, or clothing, or rest, that they are enslaved, oppressed, and miserable. This is the logic of the imagination and the passions; which seek to aggrandise what excites admiration and to heap contempt on misery, to raise power into tyranny, and to make tyranny absolute; to thrust down that which is low still lower, and to make wretches desperate: to exalt magistrates into kings, kings into gods; to degrade subjects to the rank of slaves, and slaves to the condition of brutes. The history of mankind is a romance, a mask, a tragedy, constructed upon the principles of poetical justice; it is a noble or royal hunt, in which what is sport to the few is death to the many, and in which the spectators halloo and encourage the strong to set upon the weak, and cry havoc in the chase though they do not share in the spoil. We may depend upon it that what men delight to read in books, they will put in practice in reality.[57]

In this way Hazlitt demonstrated how poetry might be used to glorify tyranny and oppression, a tendency he saw disturbingly prominent in Coriolanus. A lifelong advocate of individual freedom and the cause of the people as against the oppression of aristocracy, the tyranny of "legitimate" monarchy,[58] Hazlitt was disturbed by this tendency in the human imagination as expressed in poetry, and it was here that these misgivings first entered into his general theory of poetry.[50] These thoughts were not particularly noticed for a century and a half, when critic John Kinnaird pointed out how curiously at odds with the more typical critical theories of poetry Hazlitt's idea was, setting him apart from contemporaries such as Wordsworth and Coleridge: "Students of Hazlitt's thought have strangely neglected this passage, yet the idea it introduces is perhaps the most original, and surely the most heretical, idea in the entire range of his criticism."[50] Kinnaird notes that Lionel Trilling was the first critic to grasp the "originality and importance of this passage", though even Trilling interpreted Hazlitt's idea of the human love of power in too narrow a sense.[59]

Having observed the workings of what he thought an alarming tendency of the poetic imagination, as well as Shakespeare's possible aristocratic bias, Hazlitt then observes that, after all, traits of Coriolanus's character emerge, even in this dramatic context, that Shakespeare clearly shows to be less than admirable. For example, "Coriolanus complains of the fickleness of the people: yet, the instant he cannot gratify his pride and obstinacy at their expense, he turns his arms against his own country. If his country was not worth defending, why did he build his pride in its defence?"[60]

Ultimately, Hazlitt tried to form a balanced judgement of the play. Comparing Hazlitt's account with that of a famous contemporary, David Bromwich thought that nothing like this critical stance can "be found anywhere in the whole range of Coleridge's criticism."[61]

The character of Sir John Falstaff appeared in three of Shakespeare's plays, Henry IV, Part 1, Henry IV, Part 2, and The Merry Wives of Windsor. The bulk of Hazlitt's commentary on the two history plays is devoted to Falstaff, whom he considers to be "perhaps the most substantial comic character ever invented".[62]

Falstaff had been of interest to Shakespearean commentators for years. Forty years earlier, a full-length book had appeared, An Essay on the Dramatic Character of Sir John Falstaff (1777), by Maurice Morgann, often taken as the beginning of that school of Shakespearean criticism which considers the characters of Shakespeare's plays as though they were real people.[63] Hazlitt, who seems to have had little acquaintance with Morgann's work,[64] is careful never to lose sight of Falstaff's status as a character in a play[65]—three plays, in fact, though the two parts of Henry IV are examined in a single essay.

In conveying his impressions of Falstaff, Hazlitt first emphasises the sheer physical bulk that we remember him by: "We are as well acquainted with his person as his mind, and his jokes come upon us with double force and relish from the quantity of flesh through which they make their way, as he shakes his fat sides with laughter [...].[62]

Then Hazlitt observes the connection between Falstaff's body and his "wit": "Falstaff's wit is an emanation of a fine constitution; an exuberance of good-humour and good-nature; an overflowing of his love of laughter and good fellowship; a giving vent to his heart's ease, and over-contentment with himself and others."[66]

Answering those who consider Falstaff a "mere sensualist", he points out how little we actually see Falstaff indulging himself. "All this is as much in imagination as in reality. His sensuality does not engross and stupify his other faculties [...]. His imagination keeps up the ball after his senses have done with it. He seems to have even a greater enjoyment of the freedom from restraint, of good cheer, of his ease, of his vanity, in the ideal exaggerated description he gives of them, than in fact."[67]

This leads Hazlitt to consider why, when Falstaff "is represented as a liar, a braggart, a coward, a glutton, etc., [...] we are not offended but delighted with him [...]."[68] The answer is that "he is all these as much to amuse others as to gratify himself. He openly assumes all these characters to shew the humourous part of them. The unrestrained indulgence of his own ease, appetites, and convenience, has neither malice nor hypocrisy in it. In a word, he is an actor in himself almost as much as upon the stage, and we no more object to the character of Falstaff in a moral point of view than we should think of bringing an excellent comedian, who should represent him to the life, before one of the police offices."[68]

Hazlitt goes on to present extracts of his favourite scenes, including those between Falstaff and Prince Hal, and Falstaff and Mistress Quickly. This is merged into a consideration of the way Falstaff interacts with some other characters, and the way Shakespeare's characters reflect on one another, each in his or her behaviour shedding light on key traits in the others.[69]

This in turn leads to commentary on the "heroic and serious parts of" Henry IV, parts 1 and 2, and, finally, to more general reflections on Shakespeare's genius.[70] But the character of Falstaff has had the lion's share of the discussion, and Hazlitt ends his essay on the two history plays by balancing his personal feelings about Falstaff with a more distanced, objective comment on the dramas as history plays in a broader context:

"The truth is, that we never could forgive the Prince's treatment of Falstaff [...]" by banishing him after the Prince has become King Henry V, "though perhaps Shakespear knew what was best, according to the history, the nature of the times, and of the man."[71]

Hazlitt's enthusiastic explanation of how Falstaff's fatness contributes to our amused sympathy with him was later especially admired by the critic John Dover Wilson.[72] And John Kinnaird considered the "sketch of Falstaff" in this essay to be a "masterpiece", "a brilliant [...] portrait of comic exuberance incarnate", though perhaps in part a creation of his own imagination rather than being entirely faithful to the character as created by Shakespeare.[73] More recently the critic Harold Bloom, in a book devoted entirely to Falstaff, approvingly noted Hazlitt's appreciative commentary on the character, quoting Hazlitt's observation that Falstaff "lives in a perpetual holiday and open house, and we live with him in a round of invitations to a rump and dozen."[74]

Falstaff's appearance in The Merry Wives of Windsor is far less significant; although he found things to admire in this play, to Hazlitt, "Falstaff in the Merry Wives of Windsor is not the man he was in the two parts of Henry IV."[75]

Though at times Hazlitt delighted in actors' interpretations of Shakespearean characters, and he thought some of Shakespeare's plays eminently suited for the stage, he opens the chapter on Hamlet by proclaiming, "We do not like to see our author's plays acted, and least of all, Hamlet".[76] Here, more than anywhere else, he sides with Charles Lamb in believing Shakespeare's plays to suffer in stage presentation. Neither John Kemble nor his favourite actor Edmund Kean played the role of Hamlet to his satisfaction. "Mr. Kean's Hamlet is as much too splenetic and rash as Mr. Kemble's is too deliberate and formal."[76] This, he felt, is a play to be read, and he noted that by his time it had already been so often read as to have become part of the common culture. "This is that Hamlet the Dane, whom we read of in our youth".[77] One might say, he observes, that Hamlet is just a character in a play: "Hamlet is a name; his speeches and sayings but the idle coinage of the poet's brain."[78] Yet Shakespeare gives those sayings a reality in the mind of the reader, making them "as real as our own thoughts."[78]

Of all Shakespeare's plays, this one is "the most remarkable for the ingenuity, originality, and unstudied developement of character",[79] writes Hazlitt. He thought of Hamlet more often than any of Shakespeare's other plays because "it abounds most in striking reflections on human life, and because the distresses of Hamlet are transferred, by the turn of his mind, to the general account of humanity."[79]

"The character of Hamlet [...] is not a character marked by strength of will or even of passion, but by refinement of thought and sentiment",[80] writes Hazlitt, and he sides with Schlegel and Coleridge in thinking that Hamlet "seems incapable of deliberate action".[81] "His ruling passion is to think, not to act".[82]

Although the focus in this essay is largely on the character of Prince Hamlet, Hazlitt also comments on the movement of the dramatic action. Shakespeare lends all the characters and settings an air of verisimilitude, so that the reader might consider "the whole play [to be] an exact transcription of what might be supposed to have taken place at the court of Denmark, at the remote period of time fixed upon, before the modern refinements in morals and manners were heard of. [...] the characters think and speak and act just as they might do, if left entirely to themselves. There is no set purpose, no straining at a point."[83]

Hazlitt also reflects on Shakespeare's thorough understanding of the complexity of human character. Queen Gertrude, "who was so criminal in some respects [was] not without sensibility and affection in other relations of life."[84] Again, he comments on the idea expressed by other critics that some characters are too inconsistent in their behaviour to be plausible, particularly Polonius. If "his advice to [his son] Laertes is very excellent, and his advice to the King and Queen on the subject of Hamlet's madness very ridiculous",[85] that is "because [Shakespeare] kept up the distinction which there is in nature, between the understandings and the moral habits of men. [...] Polonius is not a fool, but he makes himself so."[76]

Hazlitt's essay on Hamlet was later used by David Bromwich in an extensive comparison of Coleridge's and Hazlitt's critical views in general. Although, to Bromwich, Coleridge's criticism of Hamlet contained a greater number of original ideas, including the general assessment of Prince Hamlet's character, Hazlitt's view is notable in that it does not, like Coleridge, reduce that character to a single dominating flaw, his inability to act. In one of his lectures on Shakespeare, Coleridge claimed that "Shakespeare wished to impress upon us the truth that action is the chief end of existence—that no faculties of intellect, however brilliant, can be considered valuable, or indeed otherwise than as misfortunes, if they withdraw us from or render us repugnant to action, and lead us to think and think of doing, until the time has elapsed when we can do anything effectually."[86] Hazlitt, on the other hand, instead of applying this moral, pointed to the necessity of each reader's identifying with Hamlet to understand him (which, he believed, occurred more readily than with any other of Shakespeare's characters) and the reader's judging of Hamlet in part on the basis of what that reader then saw in himself. This made it unlikely that Hamlet's entire character would be reduced to a single flaw that would provide the reader with a moral lesson.[87]

Shakespeare did not force Prince Hamlet to conform to any particular rules of morality. "The moral perfection of this character has been called in question", Hazlitt writes, but "the ethical delineations of [Shakespeare] do not exhibit the drab-coloured quakerism of morality."[88] Hazlitt understood that human character is too complicated for such a portrayal to conform to the truth of human nature.[89] "On the morality of literature", observes Bromwich, "Coleridge will usually be found a resolute guide, and Hazlitt an unsettling observer."[90]

John Kinnaird also paid particular attention to Hazlitt's "celebrated" sketch of Prince Hamlet in this essay.[91] Although Hazlitt does not entirely belong to the school of pure "character" critics, this essay does tend to be more of a "character" criticism than others, asserts Kinnaird, because Hazlitt shared with his Romantic contemporaries an "ambivalence toward tragedy". Hamlet to him as to his contemporaries was a modern character who was "obsessed with evil in the world[,] [...] long[ed] to escape from knowledge of it in themselves [and had a] pessimistic sense that suffering changes nothing and that the world must go on as it is."[92] Thus, Hazlitt could declare, "It is we who are Hamlet."[78]

Hazlitt incorporated into this chapter material from his review of Kean's performance of Hamlet at Drury Lane on 12 March 1814 ("Mr. Kean's Hamlet", The Morning Chronicle, 14 March 1814).[93] That review already included Hazlitt's musings on the difficulty of presenting Hamlet on stage, after seeing how even his favourite Kean failed to interpret Hamlet's character adequately. The celebrated passages that begin with "This is that Hamlet the Dane" and include the assertion "It is we who are Hamlet" appear, however, only in the final form of the essay in Characters of Shakespear's Plays.[78]

In the essay on King Lear, which he entitled simply "Lear", Hazlitt makes no references to the performances of any actors. In fact, here he fully agrees with Lamb that King Lear, like Hamlet, cannot be adequately presented on stage. No actors, he felt, could do justice to the overwhelming imaginative power of this play.[94]

Hazlitt was so deeply affected by this tragedy that he begins the chapter with a regret that he had to write about it at all. "To attempt to give a description of the play itself or its effect upon the mind, is mere impertinence".[95] Yet what he did write turned out to be a major piece of literary criticism that contributed to his general concepts about tragedy and poetry, and made a powerful impression on the poet John Keats.[96]

"The greatest strength of genius", Hazlitt writes, "is shewn in describing the strongest passions".[25] This play takes as its subject the strongest passions,[95] and Shakespeare's genius rose to the occasion. Here, Shakespeare was more "in earnest" than in any of his other creations, and "he was fairly caught in the web of his own imagination".[95] The result was his best tragedy, and therefore his best play.[24]

Of King Lear in general, Hazlitt writes:

The passion which he has taken as his subject is that which strikes its root deepest into the human heart [...] This depth of nature, this force of passion, this tug and war of the elements of our being, this firm faith in filial piety, and the giddy anarchy and whirling tumult of the thoughts at finding this prop failing it, the contrast between the fixed, immovable basis of natural affection, and the rapid, irregular starts of imagination, suddenly wrenched from all its accustomed holds and resting-places in the soul, this is what Shakespear has given, and what nobody else but he could give.[97]

Some space is devoted to the psychological scrutiny of the principal characters, but with consideration, also, of their function in the dramatic construct. "The character of Lear" is perfectly conceived for its place in the play, "the only ground on which such a story could be built with the greatest truth and effect. It is his rash haste, his violent impetuosity, his blindness to every thing but the dictates of his passions or affection, that produces all his misfortunes, that aggravates his impatience of them, that enforces our pity for him."[98]

Hazlitt then comments on some of the other characters seen not in isolation but as they interact with and affect one another, comparing and contrasting them to highlight subtle differences. For example, the characters of Goneril and Regan, the comparison of which he begins with a note of personal distaste ("they are so thoroughly hateful that we do not even like to repeat their names"),[99] are shown, he points out, partly in their reaction to their sister Cordelia's desire that they treat their father well—"'Prescribe not to us our duties'"—and partly by the contrast of their hypocrisy with the candour of the otherwise evil Edmund.[100]

Hazlitt lingers briefly on the character of Lear's third daughter, Cordelia, observing, in one of his psychological asides, that "the indiscreet simplicity of her love [...] has a little of her father's obstinacy in it".[99]

Going beyond specific characters, or even specific interactions among them, Hazlitt delineates what he calls the "logic of passion",[101] the rhythm of emotions in the drama, and its effect on the mind of the reader or viewer. "We see the ebb and flow of the feeling, its pauses and feverish starts, its impatience of opposition, its accumulating force when it has had time to recollect itself, the manner in which it avails itself of every passing word or gesture, its haste to repel insinuation, the alternate contraction and dilatation of the soul, and all 'the dazzling fence of controversy' in this mortal combat with poisoned weapons, aimed at the heart, where each wound is fatal."[102] He observes, too, in explaining an instance of what later came to be called comic relief, how when the reader's feelings are strained to the utmost, "just as [...] the fibres of the heart [...] are growing rigid from over-strained excitement [...] [t]he imagination is glad to take refuge in the half-comic, half-serious comments of the Fool, just as the mind under the extreme anguish of a surgical operation vents itself in sallies of wit."[103]

And again, on Shakespeare's artistry, Hazlitt remarks on the way the second plot, involving Gloucester, Edgar, and Edmund, is interwoven with the main plot: "Indeed, the manner in which the threads of the story are woven together is almost as wonderful in the way of art as the carrying on the tide of passion, still varying and unimpaired, is on the score of nature."[104]

Hazlitt appreciatively quotes long extracts from what he considered some of the best scenes, and remarks that, as sad as the concluding events are, "The oppression of the feelings is relieved by the very interest we take in the misfortunes of others, and by the reflections to which they give birth."[105] This leads to his mentioning the then-current practice of substituting, on stage, a happy ending for Shakespeare's tragic one, which had been approved by no less an authority than Dr. Johnson. Arguing against this practice, Hazlitt brings in a lengthy quote from an article Lamb wrote for Leigh Hunt's Reflector, which concludes: "A happy ending!—as if the living martyrdom that Lear had gone through,—the flaying of his feelings alive, did not make a fair dismissal from life the only decorous thing for him."[106]

Hazlitt, however, in the view of John Kinnaird, goes beyond Lamb in maintaining that it is Lear's very despair, by which "all the powers of thought and feeling" were elicited and intensified, that gives him tragic "strength and grandeur".[107]

By early 1818, a few months after the publication of Characters of Shakespear's Plays, John Keats had acquired a copy. Fascinated by what he read, particularly by the essay on King Lear, he underlined passages and added comments in the margins. Keats especially liked what Hazlitt wrote on the play's "ebb and flow of the feeling"[102] and noted, using a term he had heard Hazlitt himself apply to Shakespeare in his 27 January lecture "On Shakspeare and Milton",[108] "This passage has to a great degree hieroglyphic visioning."[109] Together with what he had already read of Hazlitt's work, especially the essay "On Gusto" from The Round Table, which had helped him develop his celebrated idea about "Negative Capability", this essay on King Lear inspired much of his own poetry and thoughts about poetry.[110]

Hazlitt ends the chapter by making four points about genius, poetry, and especially tragedy. To David Bromwich the most important of these is the third, "That the greatest strength of genius is shewn in describing the strongest passions: for the power of the imagination, in works of invention, must be in proportion to the force of the natural impressions, which are the subject of them."[111]

Bromwich noted that Hazlitt's thoughts, particularly as applied to Lear, are here in line with those of Shelley in his Defence of Poetry.[112] Bromwich also noted that for Hazlitt the power of this play is achieved by Shakespeare's unwillingness to soften the harshness of "nature", as expressed in Lear's halting, broken outcries, such as "I will have such revenges on you both, [Goneril and Regan]/That all the world shall——".[113] This approach is never quite followed by even so great a contemporary poet as Wordsworth. To Hazlitt, this is a demonstration of why the greatest poetry of his own age failed to achieve the level of greatness that Shakespeare reached here.[112] That King Lear is strongest in subordinating the artistry of dramatic poetry to the power of nature is also why its kind of poetry is superior to the more artificial kind produced by Pope.[114]

Among Shakespeare's four principal tragedies, Macbeth, according to Hazlitt in this chapter, is notable for its wild extremes of action, its preponderance of violence, and its representation of "imagination" strained to the verge of the forbidden and the darker mysteries of existence. "This tragedy is alike distinguished for the lofty imagination it displays, and for the tumultuous vehemence of the action; and the one is made the moving principle of the other", Hazlitt writes.[115] Macbeth "moves upon the verge of an abyss, and is a constant struggle between life and death. The action is desperate and the reaction is dreadful. [...] The whole play is an unruly chaos of strange and forbidden things, where the ground rocks under our feet."[116]

Here again, Hazlitt is interested not merely in individual characters but in the character of the play as a whole, focusing especially on the supernatural underpinnings, with the prophecies of the three witches on the "blasted heath", with which Macbeth struggles, wrestling with his destiny, through to the play's tragic climax. Hazlitt is especially interested in the "design" of Macbeth, in its general mood, its "full poetic 'impression'",[117] and in this, according to John Kinnaird, he anticipates the method of the twentieth-century Shakespearean critic G. Wilson Knight.[117] "Shakespear", writes Hazlitt, "lost sight of nothing that could in any way give relief or heightening to his subject [...]."[116]

Further noting Shakespeare's crafting of the play, Hazlitt points to fine touches at the beginning that contribute to a unified effect: "The wildness of the scenery, the sudden shifting of the situations and characters, the bustle, the expectations excited, [all] are equally extraordinary."[115] "Shakespear", he writes, "excelled in the openings of his plays: that of Macbeth is the most striking of any."[118]

He also, as in his essay on Hamlet, notes the realistic effect of Macbeth: "His plays have the force of things upon the mind. What he represents is brought home to the bosom as a part of our experience, implanted in the memory as if we had known the places, persons, and things of which he treats."[118]

In considering the characters, Hazlitt emphasises the importance of their interaction, the way in which a major character's behaviour helps define that of another. This is especially true of Macbeth and Lady Macbeth, locked together in a struggle against all Scotland and their fate. Macbeth, as he is about to commit his bloodiest deeds, is "assailed by the stings of remorse, and full of 'preternatural solicitings.' [...] In thought he is absent and perplexed, sudden and desperate in act, from his own irresolution."[119] This is in contrast with, and "set off by" the character of "Lady Macbeth, whose obdurate strength of will and masculine firmness give her the ascendancy over her husband's faultering virtue. [...] The magnitude of her resolution almost covers the magnitude of her guilt."[119] But in effect Macbeth and Lady Macbeth exchange places as the action develops. He "becomes more callous as he plunges deeper in guilt [...] and [...] in the end anticipates his wife in the boldness and bloodiness of his enterprises, while she for want of the same stimulus of action, [...] goes mad and dies."[120]

Here as elsewhere, Hazlitt illuminates the characters not only by contrast with others in the same play but with characters in other plays. A lengthy passage, adapted from an 1814 drama review by Hazlitt,[121] compares Macbeth and King Richard III from Shakespeare's play of that name. Both characters "are tyrants, usurpers, murderers, both aspiring and ambitious, both courageous, cruel, treacherous." But Richard is "naturally incapable of good" and "wades through a series of crimes [...] from the ungovernable violence of his temper and a reckless love of mischief", while Macbeth, "full of 'the milk of human kindness'", "is with difficulty prevailed upon to commit [...] the murder of Duncan" and is filled "with remorse after its perpetration."[122]

Similarly, though Lady Macbeth is evil, "[s]he is only wicked to gain a great end" and it is only her "inexorable self-will" that prevents her being diverted from her "bad purpose" which masks her "natural affections";[123] whereas Goneril and Regan, in King Lear, "excite our loathing and abhorrence" as Lady Macbeth does not.[119] Further, Hazlitt notes that Lady Macbeth displays human emotions, "swelling exultation and keen spirit of triumph, [...] uncontroulable eagerness of anticipation [...] solid, substantial flesh and blood display of passion"; while the witches from the same play are only "hags of mischief", "unreal, abortive, half-existences".[124]

Because of their human qualities, we never entirely lose sympathy with Macbeth and Lady Macbeth, and our imagination participates with theirs in the tragedy. Their imagination makes the two more human and yet also destroys them. As Kinnaird points out (elaborating on an idea of Joseph W. Donohue, Jr.), Hazlitt in part sees Macbeth as a tragedy of imagination itself.[125]

One concern addressed by Hazlitt is the assertion by previous critics that Macbeth is little more than a crude and violent amalgam of extremes filled with "Gothic" barbarisms.[126] Hazlitt notes, however, that should anyone think Macbeth's character is so composed of contradictory extremes as to be implausible, it is, rather, the circumstances and the passions in conflict that provide the extremes, while Macbeth's character retains a strong underlying unity throughout. "Macbeth in Shakespear no more loses his identity of character in the fluctuations of fortune or the storm of passions than Macbeth in himself would have lost the identity of his person."[127] Kinnaird notes that here, as if anticipating it by a century, Hazlitt argues against the view advanced by Elmer Edgar Stoll in 1933, that Macbeth's character is too full of contradictions to be plausible.[126]

Although he lingers nostalgically on his memory of the great actress Sarah Siddons's performance as Lady Macbeth,[128] and a few years earlier had acknowledged that Kean and John Kemble had been at least partly successful in the role of Macbeth (though each in different portions of it),[129] on the whole he expressed doubts about the success of the staging of this play, again agreeing with Lamb.  By the time he composed this chapter of Characters, he could write, "We can conceive [...] no one to play Macbeth properly, or to look like a man that had encountered the Weïrd Sisters."[130] Further observations follow about the witches themselves. Part of the problem was that by his day, there remained few who really believed in the supernatural, and "by the force of the police and of philosophy [...] the ghosts in Shakespear will become obsolete."[130] He concludes by quoting at length a passage from an essay by Lamb on the originality of Shakespeare's portrayal of the witches.[131]

Hazlitt's treatment of The Merchant of Venice centres on the character of Shylock. A few years earlier, Edmund Kean had appeared as the Jewish moneylender in his debut performance at Drury Lane. Hazlitt, the drama critic for the Morning Chronicle in January 1814, sat close to the stage and watched every facial expression, every movement.[132] He was astounded at Kean's, for the time, radically unconventional portrayal of Shylock as a full, rounded, complex human being, full of vigour, rather than a doddering, malevolent stereotype.[133] His positive review of Kean's performance became critical in boosting the actor's career. But Kean's performance also helped alter Hazlitt's own view of Shylock, which made its way into this essay a few years later. Hazlitt admitted that he had tended to accept the older interpretation of Shylock's character as it had been depicted on stage, which followed centuries-old prejudices against the Jews, and made him a one-dimensional character. Kean's performance led him to study the play closely and think deeply about Shylock. Though Shylock's "mind is warped with prejudices and passion [...] that he has but one idea, is not true; he has more ideas than any other person in the piece; and if he is intense and inveterate in the pursuit of his purpose, he shews the utmost elasticity, vigour, and presence of mind, in the means of attaining it".[133]

Although old prejudices against the Jews were starting to disappear, as Hazlitt notes (he refers to the portrayal of "the benevolent Jew" in Richard Cumberland's play The Jew of 1794),[134] and some reviewers had begun to discover something respectable in Shylock's figure, a century and a half later critic David Bromwich would suggest that, in retrospect, it was Hazlitt himself, even more than Kean, who paved the way for what became the prevalent reading of Shylock's character. Though Shylock is serious about revenge, he is true to himself in other ways that cast a less than favourable light on other characters in the play.[132] After Hazlitt's account, according to Bromwich, it became less easy to find a simple resolution to the problems in the play or to withhold entirely our sympathy for Shylock,[135] particularly in view of a passage like the following:

Shylock is a good hater; "a man no less sinned against than sinning." If he carries his revenge too far, yet he has strong grounds for "the lodged hate he bears Anthonio", which he explains with equal force of eloquence and reason. He seems the depositary of the vengeance of his race; and though the long habit of brooding over daily insults and injuries has crusted over his temper with inveterate misanthropy, and hardened him against the contempt of mankind, this adds but little to the triumphant pretensions of his enemies. There is a strong, quick, and deep sense of justice mixed up with the gall and bitterness of his resentment. [...] The desire of revenge is almost inseparable from the sense of wrong; and we can hardly help sympathising with the proud spirit, hid beneath his "Jewish gaberdine", stung to madness by repeated undeserved provocations, and labouring to throw off the load of obloquy and oppression heaped upon him and all his tribe by one desperate act of "lawful" revenge, till the ferociousness of the means by which he is to execute his purpose, and the pertinacity with which he adheres to it, turn us against him; but even at last, when disappointed of the sanguinary revenge with which he had glutted his hopes, and exposed to beggary and contempt by the letter of the law on which he had insisted with so little remorse, we pity him, and think him hardly dealt with by his judges.[136]

Other critics even in later years insisted that the character of Shylock is that of an outsider separated from society, that the Jewish Shylock represented an older form of justice, meant to be supplanted by the Christian view, represented by Portia, who argued for the prevalence of mercy. Shylock, these critics maintained, must be removed in order to allow society to attain a Christian form of peace. Hazlitt's view, however, has remained as a valid countervailing concept of the play, one that does not arrive at easy conclusions or take sides readily.[137]

Hazlitt also reflects on several other characters. Portia, for example, was no favourite of his, and "has a certain degree of affectation and pedantry about her".[138] Gratiano he finds "a very admirable subordinate character".[139]

Once again, as John Kinnaird observed, Hazlitt is here far more than a "character critic", showing serious interest in the structure of the play as a whole.[21] "The whole of the trial-scene", he remarks in this essay, "is a master-piece of dramatic skill. The legal acuteness, the passionate declamations, the sound maxims of jurisprudence, the wit and irony interspersed in it, the fluctuations of hope and fear in the different persons, and the completeness and suddenness of the catastrophe, cannot be surpassed".[140] He points to some beautiful poetic passages, and concludes that "the graceful winding up of this play [...] is one of the happiest instances of Shakespear's knowledge of the principles of the drama".[141]

While Hazlitt's discussion of Othello includes observations about the characters, his consideration of this play, as with all of the four major tragedies, is combined with ideas about the purpose and value of tragedy and even of poetry in general. Expanding upon Aristotle's idea in the Poetics that "tragedy purifies the affections by terror and pity,"[142] he asserts that tragedy "makes us thoughtful spectators in the lists of life. It is the refiner of the species; a discipline of humanity."[143]

Furthermore, Othello, more than the other tragedies, has for the average viewer or reader a "close[...] application" to the experiences of everyday life.[144] Hazlitt brings out this point by comparing Othello to Macbeth, where "there is a violent struggle between opposite feelings, between ambition and the stings of conscience, almost from first to last: in Othello, the doubtful conflict between contrary passions, though dreadful, continues only for a short time, and the chief interest is excited by the alternate ascendancy of different passions, by the entire and unforeseen change from the fondest love and most unbounded confidence to the tortures of jealousy and the madness of hatred."[145]

Hazlitt's discussion of the particular characters incorporates observations about the way Shakespeare creates them, showing that, rather than being broad types, characters even superficially similar differ in finely discriminated ways. Desdemona and Emilia, for example, are "to outward appearance, characters of common life, not more distinguished than women generally are, by difference of rank and situation."[145] As the dialogue unfolds, "the difference of their thoughts and sentiments is however laid open, their minds are separated from each other by signs as plain and as little to be mistaken as the complexions of their husbands."[145]

With all his frequently noted attention to character and characters[21]—Hazlitt's partly psychological approach to character necessarily referred to observed real-life behavior—he also frequently emphasises the art by which Shakespeare created dramatic "character".[146] Particularly in tragedy, a "sense of power", he believed, is the essential medium by which a poet of genius operates on the minds of his audience.[147] When the author instills in the reader or viewer's imagination the sense of power that he must have had in grasping and conveying intertwined passions, he makes us identify with a character such as Othello, and feel in ourselves the way Iago plays upon his mind so that, ironically, his weakness is made to undermine his strength.[148]

Hazlitt often focuses, as well, on specific traits by comparing the characters not to those of real life but to characters in Shakespeare's other plays, comparing, for example, Iago with Edmund in King Lear. His interest in the art of drama emerges even more obviously when he compares Iago with the villainous character Zanga in Edward Young's The Revenge (1721), still a popular play in Hazlitt's day.[149]

For Hazlitt, Othello is especially notable for the interplay between the characters, and the way Shakespeare communicates the slow and gradual "movement of passion [...] the alternate ascendancy of different passions, [...] the entire and unforeseen change from the fondest love and most unbounded confidence to the tortures of jealousy and the madness of hatred."[145] He finds especially remarkable the gradual alteration of Othello's feelings about Desdemona as his mind is played upon by Iago. Othello is not naturally a violent person in everyday life:[150] "The nature of the Moor is noble, confiding, tender and generous; but his blood is of the most inflammable kind; and being once roused by a sense of his wrongs, he is stopped by no considerations of remorse or pity till he has given a loose to all the dictates of his rage and despair. [...] The third act of Othello is [Shakespeare's] finest display, not of knowledge and passion separately, but of the two combined."[151] Hazlitt continues:

It is in working [Othello's] noble nature up to this extremity through rapid but gradual transitions, in raising passion to its height from the smallest beginnings and in spite of all obstacles, in painting the expiring conflict between love and hatred, tenderness and resentment, jealousy and remorse, in unfolding the strength and the weakness of our nature, in uniting sublimity of thought with the anguish of the keenest woe, in putting in motion the various impulses that agitate this our mortal being, and at last blending them in that noble tide of deep and sustained passion, impetuous but majestic [...] that Shakespear has shewn the mastery of his genius and of his power over the human heart.[152]

Desdemona's character is shown in her attachment to her husband. "Her beauty and external graces are only indirectly glanced at."[152] Her attachment to Othello begins in a manner "a little fantastical and headstrong."[153] But after that her "whole character consists in having no will of her own, no prompter but her obedience." Even "the extravagance of her resolutions, the pertinacity of her affections, may be said to arise out of the gentleness of her nature."[154]

Three years earlier, in the review "Mr. Kean's Iago" in The Examiner (7 August 1814), Hazlitt had ventured to speculate that Iago's suggestions of lasciviousness in Desdemona may have had some basis in truth, as "purity and grossness sometimes 'nearly are allied,/And thin partitions do their bounds divide.'"[155] Although he omitted this thought from Characters of Shakespear's Plays, that did not stop an anonymous reviewer in Blackwood's Magazine from accusing him of calling Desdemona a "lewd" character. In "A Reply to 'Z'", written in 1818 but never published, Hazlitt answers his accuser:[156] "It is not true that I have insinuated that Desdemona was a lewd woman, any more than Shakespear has insinuated it, but I have dared to say that he alone could have given additional elegance and even delicacy to a female character from the very disadvantageous circumstances in which Desdemona is placed."[157]

Hazlitt's treatment of the character of Iago is written in part as a response to those who "thought this whole character unnatural, because his villainy is without a sufficient motive."[158] Hazlitt responds with a psychological analysis that exerted great influence and sparked considerable discussion: Shakespeare "knew that the love of power, which is another name for the love of mischief, is natural to man. [...] He would know this [...] merely from seeing children paddle in the dirt or kill flies for sport. Iago in fact belongs to a class of character, common to Shakespear and at the same time peculiar to him; whose heads are as acute and active as their hearts are hard and callous. Iago is [...] an extreme instance of the kind: that is to say, of diseased intellectual activity, with the most perfect indifference to moral good or evil, or rather with a decided preference of the latter, because it falls more readily in with this favourite propensity, gives greater zest to his thoughts and scope to his actions."[159] This interpretation was later admired and built upon by Shakespearean critic A.C. Bradley.[160]

John Kinnaird later commented on Hazlitt's words terming Iago "an amateur of tragedy in real life",[161] pointing out that Bradley and others after him developed the idea that Hazlitt saw Iago as an artist in his own right, "a dramatic artist manqué".[162] "But the form Iago's will to 'mischief' takes is not primarily aesthetic or creative but practical and critical. Soldier that he is, he has a 'craving after action of the most difficult and dangerous kind,' and he has none of the artist's sympathy with pleasure; his 'licentious' bent is always 'saturnine,' and stems from 'a desire of finding out the worst side of every thing, and of proving himself an over-match for appearances' [...]".[163] David Bromwich later warned against carrying too far the idea that Iago is an artist figure within the play, a representation of Shakespeare himself, as Iago's "genius is [...] the opposite of Shakespeare's. It presents all things in a distorting medium [...]. Iago's peculiar genius is" as Hazlitt represented it, "the exuberance of one part of Shakespeare's mind—not an allegorical representation of the whole of it."[164]

The Tempest, Hazlitt claims, is one of Shakespeare's "most original and perfect" plays,[165] similar in some ways to A Midsummer Night's Dream but finer as a play, if not as rich in poetic passages.[166] The Tempest demonstrates the author to be a master of both comedy and tragedy, with a full command over "all the resources of passion, of wit, of thought, of observation".[167] Yet again, Hazlitt here devotes considerable space to not just the characters in the play, but the character of the play as a whole.[117] The world of the play seems to be created out of nothing;[165] yet, though dream-like, in large part a product of the imagination, its setting resembles that of a painting we may have seen—"Prospero's enchanted island [with its] airy music, the tempest-tost vessel, the turbulent waves, all have the effect of the landscape background of some fine picture"[168]—its poetry having a music that conjures up meaning in the listener's mind—"the songs [...] without conveying any distinct images, seem to recall all the feelings connected with them, like snatches of half-forgotten music heard indistinctly and at intervals"[169]—and its characters, many of whom, like Ariel, we know could not really exist, are drawn so as to seem "as true and natural as [Shakespeare's] real characters".[170] All is so artfully unified that "that part which is only the fantastic creation of his mind, has the same palpable texture, and coheres 'semblably' with the rest."[165]

Hazlitt provides brief appreciative sketches of many of the characters and their relationships. For example:

The courtship between Ferdinand and Miranda is one of the chief beauties of this play. It is the very purity of love. The pretended interference of Prospero with it heightens its interest, and is in character with the magician, whose sense of preternatural power makes him arbitrary, tetchy, and impatient of opposition.[166]

In quoting the speech of the old counselor Gonzalo on the ideal commonwealth he would rule, Hazlitt observes that here "Shakespear has anticipated nearly all the arguments on the Utopian schemes of modern philosophy".[171]

He scrutinises with special interest the characters of Caliban and Ariel, pointing out that, as they arise within the structure of the play, neither could exist without the other, and neither alone illuminates the sum of our nature better than both together. Caliban is gross, of the earth,[172] whereas "Ariel is imaginary power, the swiftness of thought personified."[173]

Shakespear has, as it were by design, drawn off from Caliban the elements of whatever is ethereal and refined, to compound them in the unearthly mould of Ariel. Nothing was ever more finely conceived than this contrast between the material and the spiritual, the gross and delicate.[173]

Hazlitt was particularly interested in Caliban, in part because others thought the character vulgar or evil. Though he is a "savage", "half brute, half demon",[168] and "the essence of grossness",[172] Caliban is not in the least "vulgar". "The character grows out of the soil where it is rooted, uncontrouled, uncouth and wild, uncramped by any of the meannesses of custom [....] Vulgarity is not natural coarseness, but conventional coarseness, learnt from others, contrary to, or without an entire conformity of natural power and disposition; as fashion is the common-place affectation of what is elegant and refined without any feeling of the essence of it."[172] Stephano and Trinculo are vulgar by comparison, and "in conducting [them] to Prospero's cell", by understanding the "nature" by which it is surrounded, "Caliban shews the superiority of natural capacity over greater knowledge and greater folly."[174]

Casting a retrospective light on his interest in Caliban in Characters of Shakespear's Plays, the following year Hazlitt, in a review of "Mr. Coleridge's Lectures", responded indignantly to Coleridge's calling Caliban a "villain", as well as a "Jacobin",[175] who wanted only to spread anarchy. Though speaking somewhat tongue-in-cheek, Hazlitt rises to Caliban's defence: "Caliban is so far from being a prototype of modern Jacobinism, that he is strictly the legitimate sovereign of the isle".[176] Hazlitt did not necessarily believe that Caliban deserved to supplant Prospero as ruler, but he shows that Caliban's very existence raises questions about the fundamental nature of sovereignty, justice, and society itself. As noted by David Bromwich, Coleridge found reasons to apologise for society as it was. Hazlitt, on the other hand, refused to take sides, leaving as open questions the issues that emerged in the play. "It was left to Hazlitt to interpret Caliban's coarseness and the justice of his protests as both alike irreducible."[177]

Hazlitt's commentary on Twelfth Night uses Shakespeare's play to illustrate some of his general ideas about comedy, thoughts that he explored at greater length in later works, such as his Lectures on the English Comic Writers (1819).[178]

Nobody, according to Hazlitt (voicing his disagreement with Dr. Johnson), excelled Shakespeare in tragedy; although his comedies could be first rate, other writers, such as Molière, Cervantes, and Rabelais, excelled him in some types of comedy.[179] It was in the comedy of "Nature" that Shakespeare was supreme. This is not comedy that satirises the "ridiculous" but is rather the comedy of "convivial laughter",[180] which gently mocks human foibles and invites us to share in innocent pleasures.  Of this kind of comedy, Twelfth Night is "one of the most delightful".[181] Unlike the "comedy of artificial life, of wit, of satire,"[182] Shakespeare's more gentle comedy "makes us laugh at the follies of mankind, not despise them [...]. Shakespear's comic genius resembles the bee rather in its power of extracting sweets from weeds or poisons, than in leaving a sting behind it."[181]

Besides his further general remarks, Hazlitt lingers appreciatively over a number of amusing scenes and poetic passages, including the songs, all showing how "Shakespear's comedy is of a pastoral and poetical cast. Folly is indigenous to the soil [....] Absurdity has every encouragement afforded it; and nonsense has room to flourish in."[183] Characters of vastly different types are all welcome and fit into his scheme: "the same house is big enough to hold Malvolio, the Countess, Maria, Sir Toby, and Sir Andrew Ague-cheek."[184] He particularly admires the character of Viola, whom Shakespeare gives many speeches of "impassioned sweetness".[185] Characterising the play as a whole by quoting the author's own words in it—"Shakespear alone could describe the effect of his own poetry."—he reflects that the play's poetry comes "'o'er the ear like the sweet south/That breathes upon a bank of violets,/Stealing and giving odour.'"[185]

Here Hazlitt steps back to observe his own character, musing that if he himself were less "saturnine", he might well like the comedies as much as the tragedies, or at least that is how he feels, "after reading [...] parts of this play".[186]

Although Hazlitt had seen As You Like It on stage, he remembered it most fondly from having read it so frequently that he practically had it memorised.[187] In Characters of Shakespear's Plays, he makes no mention at all of any stage performances, treating the play as one primarily meant to be read. What strikes him as most notable about it is its character of a "pastoral drama", one that presents an "ideal" world—that is, a world of thought and imagination, not action. And though it is a comedy, its interest derives not so much from in our being made to laugh at any particular human follies, but rather, "more out of the sentiments and characters than out of the actions or situations. It is not what is done, but what is said, that claims our attention."[188]

"The very air of the place", wrote Hazlitt about the Forest of Arden, "seems to breathe a spirit of philosophical poetry; to stir the thoughts, to touch the heart with pity, as the drowsy forest rustles to the sighing gale",[189] and the character who most embodies the philosophical spirit of the place is Jacques, who "is the only purely contemplative character in Shakespear."[189] Among the lovers, Hazlitt particularly likes the character of Rosalind, "made up of sportive gaiety and natural tenderness".[190] And the couples, Touchstone and Audrey, and Silvius and Phebe, have their different places in the picture.[191] The other characters, including Orlando and the Duke, also come in for their share of commentary.[189] All in all, Hazlitt finds this to be one of the most quotable and quoted of Shakespear's plays: "There is hardly any of Shakespear's plays that contains a greater number of passages that have been quoted in books of extracts, or a greater number of phrases that have become in a manner proverbial."[192]

Hazlitt's concept of the play as one in which the interest is intended to arise not out of the action or situation but rather its contemplative nature has remained a vital one, reaching into the twentieth century,[193] and now the twenty-first.[194]

Measure for Measure has frequently been considered a "problem play". It was a problem for Hazlitt in that it contains almost no character with whom one can feel complete sympathy. "[T]here is in general a want of passion; the affections are at a stand; our sympathies are reflected and defeated in all directions."[195] Angelo, the Deputy ruler of Vienna, is forgiven by the Duke but draws only Hazlitt's hatred, as "he seems to have a much greater passion for hypocrisy than for his mistress."[195] "Neither are we enamoured of Isabella's rigid chastity, though she could not act otherwise than she did."[195] Isabella's brother Claudio "is the only person who feels naturally", yet even he does not show well in his pleading for life at the sacrifice of his sister's virginity. There is no easy solution for his plight, and "he is placed in circumstances of distress which almost preclude the wish for his deliverance."[196] Over a century later, commentator R.W. Chambers placed Hazlitt as the first of a long line of notable Shakespearean critics who felt the same way,[197] and he quoted Characters of Shakespear's Plays in establishing his contention (as a basis for arguing his own different view of the play) that Hazlitt was among the first of dozens of distinguished critics who could not comprehend how Mariana could love and plead for someone like Angelo, and in general showed a distaste for much in Measure for Measure.[198]

Yet, unlike Coleridge,[198] and despite his own reservations, Hazlitt found much to admire in Measure for Measure, a "play as full of genius as it is of wisdom."[195] He quotes at length passages of "dramatic beauty",[199] and also finds occasion to use this play as an example supporting his characterisation of the general nature of Shakespeare's genius, and the relation between morality and poetry. "Shakespear was in one sense the least moral of all writers; for morality (commonly so called) is made up of antipathies [...]".[200] Yet "in another [sense] he was the greatest of all moralists. He was a moralist in the same sense in which nature is one. He taught what he had learnt from her. He shewed the greatest knowledge of humanity with the greatest fellow-feeling for it."[201]

Although Hazlitt had reviewed a performance of Measure for Measure for The Examiner on 11 February 1816,[202] and incorporated a few passages, with modifications, into this chapter, including some of his general philosophical reflections and a mention of some of Schlegel's opinions,[203] yet he says nothing in Characters of Shakespear's Plays about any stage performances of this play.

Hazlitt believed that because tragedy engages our emotions most profoundly, it is the greatest kind of drama.[204] Of the tragedies based on Greek and Roman history, he ranked Julius Caesar beneath the other Roman tragedies, Coriolanus and Antony and Cleopatra.[205] But, as elsewhere, he expresses admiration for the fine discrimination of character, the depiction of "the manners of the common people, and the jealousies and heart-burnings of the different factions" in Julius Caesar.[206]

In Antony and Cleopatra, "Shakespear's genius has spread over the whole play a richness like the overflowing of the Nile".[207] Overall, this play "presents a fine picture of Roman pride and Eastern magnificence: and in the struggle between the two, the empire of the world seems suspended, 'like the swan's down feather,/That stands upon the swell at full of tide,/And neither way inclines.'"[208]

Timon of Athens, to Hazlitt "as much a satire as a play",[209] seemed to him "to be written with as intense a feeling of his subject as any one play of Shakespear" and "is the only play of our author in which spleen is the predominant feeling of the mind."[209]

A focal point of Hazlitt's account of Troilus and Cressida is a comparison of the characterisation in this play and that in Chaucer's poem Troilus and Criseyde (one of Shakespeare's sources). Chaucer's characters are full and well developed; but Chaucer unfolded each character in itself, one at a time. Shakespeare displayed characters as they see themselves as well as how others see them, and showed the effects each has on the others. Shakespeare's characters were so distinctive that it is as if each were expressed by a distinct "faculty" of his mind; and, in effect, these faculties could be viewed as showing "excessive sociability", notable for "how they gossiped and compared notes together."[210] Twentieth-century critic Arthur Eastman thought that, although these remarks did insufficient justice to Chaucer, they were particularly original in revealing "the sophisticated genius of Shakespeare."[211]

For Hazlitt, the essence of Romeo and Juliet is Shakespeare's portrayal of the love that comes with "the ripening of the youthful blood";[212] and with that love the imagination of the youthful lovers is stirred to dwell not so much on present pleasure but "on all the pleasures they had not experienced. All that was to come of life was theirs. [...] Their hopes were of air, their desires of fire."[213] In many beautiful poetic passages, "the feelings of youth and of the spring are [...] blended together like the breath of opening flowers."[214] Assessing the character of the play as a whole, he states: "This play presents a beautiful coup-d'oeil of the progress of human life. In thought it occupies years, and embraces the circle of the affections from childhood to old age."[215]

In Hazlitt's commentary on King John, his last on any of the history plays, he offers his view of history plays in general: "If we are to indulge our imaginations, we had rather do it upon an imaginary theme; if we are to find subjects for the exercise of our pity and terror, we prefer seeking them in fictitious danger and fictitious distress."[216]

Still, he finds much to appreciate in the history plays: here, it is the weak, vacillating, sometimes contemptible character of King John;[217] the "comic" but forthright, noble character of Philip the Bastard;[218] the desperation and excess of maternal tenderness in Constance;[219] and many beautiful and affecting passages. Hazlitt also offers some reflections on Shakespeare's versification. There was some controversy over whether this play was genuinely Shakespeare's. He concludes that the verse shows that it certainly was, a judgement borne out by later critics.[220]

Hazlitt remarks that Richard II, less well known than Richard III, is the finer play. Worth noting is the exchange of places between the King and Bolingbroke, the usurping king—"The steps by which Bolingbroke mounts the throne are those by which Richard sinks into the grave"—[221] and he compares the manner and politics of the age with those of his own. Among various poetical passages, he finds the speech of John of Gaunt in praise of England, "one of the most eloquent that ever was penned."[222]

Henry V Hazlitt thought only second-rate among Shakespeare's plays, yet filled with much fine poetry. Regarding the King himself, he considered the character of this "pageant" play[223] entertaining enough, until one compares King Henry with the historical Henry V, who was as barbarous as any of the historical absolute monarchs.[224]

Henry VI, the three parts considered together in one chapter, is not, for Hazlitt, on a level with the other history plays, but, in a long comparison of King Henry VI with King Richard II, he finds occasion to reinforce his major theme of the fine discrimination of superficially similar characters.[225]

Richard III for Hazlitt is preeminently made for acting, "properly a stage play; it belongs to the theatre, rather than to the closet."[226] It is dominated by the character of King Richard, whom Shakespeare portrays as

towering and lofty; equally impetuous and commanding; haughty, violent, and subtle; bold and treacherous; confident in his strength as well as in his cunning; raised high by his birth, and higher by his talents and his crimes; a royal usurper, a princely hypocrite, a tyrant, and a murderer of the house of Plantagenet.[227]

Hazlitt comments on the efforts of several actors in playing the role, particularly Kean. Portions of his review of Kean's first performance as Richard, written for The Morning Chronicle of 15 February 1814, were incorporated into this chapter.[228]

Differing with Dr. Johnson, who found nothing of genius in Henry VIII but the depiction of the "'meek sorrows and virtuous distress'" of Queen Katherine,[229] Hazlitt finds in this play, though not one of Shakespeare's greatest, "considerable interest of a more mild and thoughtful cast, and some of the most striking passages in the author's works."[230] In addition to the portrayal of Katherine, Hazlitt likes that of Cardinal Wolsey and of King Henry himself, which, though "drawn with great truth and spirit [is] like a very disagreeable portrait, sketched by the hand of a master."[231] And "the scene of [the Duke of] Buckingham led to execution is one of the most affecting and natural in Shakespear, and one to which there is hardly an approach in any other author."[232]

Reflecting on Twelfth Night, Hazlitt considered that his own preference for tragedy could be in part due to his own "saturnine" temperament, and asserted that, regardless of individual preferences, Shakespeare was as skilled in comedy as in tragedy.[186] With this acknowledgement, he had quite a few appreciative comments to make about the comedies.

Hazlitt found sheer delight in A Midsummer Night's Dream,[233] especially relishing its playfully inventive poetry and quoting at length several of his favourite passages. He also considers how it exhibits the fine discrimination of character to be found everywhere in Shakespeare. As elsewhere, he crosses the boundaries of plays and enumerates subtle differences between even the fairy characters, in this case in an extensive comparison of Puck in this play and Ariel in The Tempest.[234]

This is one play that Hazlitt felt cannot be properly represented on stage. Its beauties are primarily those of poetry: "Poetry and the stage do not agree well together. The ideal can have no place upon the stage, which is a picture without perspective. [...] Where all is left to the imagination (as is the case in reading) every circumstance [...] has an equal chance of being kept in mind, and tells according to the mixed impression of all that has been suggested."[235]

Although the early play The Two Gentlemen of Verona seemed to Hazlitt like "little more than the first outlines of a comedy loosely sketched in", he also found in it "passages of high poetical spirit, and of inimitable quaintness of humour".[236]

Hazlitt proclaims The Winter's Tale as "one of the best-acting of our author's plays",[237] and recalls with delight some of his favourite actors who played the parts, including Sarah Siddons and John Kemble.[238] He notes the incisive psychology of the unfolding of King Leontes's madness,[239] the appealing roguery of Autolycus,[237] and the charm of Perdita's and Florizel's speeches,[240] after wondering how it could be that Pope doubted the authenticity of the play as Shakespeare's.[241]

Hazlitt thought All's Well that Ends Well to be a particularly "pleasing" play,[242] though less as a comedy than as a serious dramatisation of an original tale by Boccaccio.[243] Helena is a noble example of womanhood,[244] and, in the comic part of the play, Hazlitt is especially amused by the character of Parolles, the "parasite and hanger on of [Count] Bertram's whose "folly, boasting, and cowardice [... and] false pretensions to bravery and honour" are unmasked in "a very amusing episode."[245] The source of Shakespeare's play leads Hazlitt to digress at length on the writing of Boccaccio, who had never had "justice [...] done him by the world."[246]

Love's Labour's Lost, thought Hazlitt, "transports us quite as much to the manners of the court, and the quirks of the courts of law, as to the scenes of nature or the fairy-land of [Shakespeare's] own imagination. Shakespear has set himself to imitate the tone of polite conversation then prevailing among the fair, the witty, and the learned".[247] "If we were to part with any of the author's comedies", he writes, "it should be this."[248] Yet he also mentions many amusing characters, dramatic scenes, and noble lines of poetry he would not willingly part with, quoting at length long passages spoken by both Biron[249] and by Rosaline.[250]

Much Ado About Nothing Hazlitt found to be an "admirable comedy", neatly balancing the comic against more serious matter.[251] He reflects, "Perhaps that middle point of comedy was never more nicely hit in which the ludicrous blends with the tender, and our follies, turning round against themselves in support of our affections, retain nothing but their humanity."[252]

The Taming of the Shrew Hazlitt sums up very simply as "almost the only one of Shakespear's comedies that has a regular plot, and downright moral [....] It shows admirably how self-will is only to be got the better of by stronger will, and how one degree of ridiculous perversity is only to be driven out by another still greater."[253]

While The Comedy of Errors has a few passages "which bear the decided stamp of [Shakespeare's] genius", Hazlitt for the most part characterises it as "taken very much from the Menaechmi of Plautus, and is not an improvement on it."[254]

Hazlitt ends his detailed account of the plays with a chapter on "Doubtful Plays of Shakespear", the greater part of which consists of direct quotations from Schlegel, whose remarks Hazlitt finds worth considering, if he does not always agree with them. Most of the plays now accepted as Shakespeare's, or at least partly by Shakespeare, were also accepted as his by Hazlitt. The two notable exceptions were Titus Andronicus and Pericles, Prince of Tyre. Of the former, Hazlitt nevertheless respected Schlegel's defence of it enough to quote the latter at length.[255] And he allows that some parts of Pericles could have been by Shakespeare but more likely were "imitations" of Shakespeare "by some contemporary poet."[256]

Hazlitt felt compelled to add to his commentary on the plays some words on Shakespeare's nondramatic poetry, in the chapter "Poems and Sonnets". While he liked a few of the sonnets,[257] for the most part Hazlitt found Shakespeare's nondramatic poetry to be artificial, mechanical, and, overall, "laboured, uphill work."[258] On the whole, wrote Hazlitt, "Our idolatry of Shakespear [...] ceases with his plays."[259]

Characters of Shakespear's Plays argues against a century and a half of criticism that saw Shakespeare as a "child of nature", deficient in art and full of faults.[260] To anchor his position, Hazlitt makes an observation by the poet Alexander Pope—despite Pope's being one of those very critics—his unifying theme: "every single character in Shakespear, is as much an individual, as those in life itself",[261] and he explores the Shakespearean art that, as much as observation of nature, brought those characters to life.[146]

Much of the book synthesises Hazlitt's own views with those of his predecessors in Shakespearean criticism. The greatest of these critics was August Wilhelm Schlegel, the contemporary German literary scholar and critic who also heavily influenced Coleridge[262] and who Hazlitt believed appreciated Shakespeare better than any English critic.[261] "Certainly no writer among ourselves", wrote Hazlitt, "has shown either the same admiration of his genius, or the same philosophical acuteness in pointing out his characteristic excellences."[263]

Hazlitt also merges with his presentation, in a general way, the approach of his immediate British predecessors, the "character critics", like Maurice Morgann, who had begun to take a psychological approach, focusing on how the characters in the plays behave and think like people we know in real life.[264]

In this vein, each of Hazlitt's essays incorporates numerous often very personal commentaries on the characters. For example, in the account of Cymbeline, he announces, "We have almost as great an affection for Imogen as she had for Posthumus; and she deserves it better."[37] And comparing Falstaff with Prince Hal, he proclaims, "Falstaff is the better man of the two."[265] Commenting on "the character of Hamlet", he in effect joins a discussion among his contemporaries, adding to the mix of similar assessments by Goethe,[266] Schlegel,[267] and Coleridge[268] his observation that Hamlet "is not a character marked by strength of will or even of passion, but by refinement of thought and sentiment."[80]

Although Hazlitt's attention to "characters" in this manner was not original,[269] and was later criticised,[270] he built upon the approach, adding his own conceptions of how Shakespeare presented human nature and experience.[271]

One idea, elaborating on his originally stated theme, to which Hazlitt returns several times—in Macbeth,[127] A Midsummer Night's Dream,[234] Henry IV,[272] and elsewhere—is that Shakespeare does not only create highly individual characters. More than any other dramatist, he creates characters that are of similar general types, and yet, as in real life, differ in subtle ways:

Shakespear was scarcely more remarkable for the force and marked contrasts of his characters than for the truth and subtlety with which he has distinguished those which approached the nearest to each other. For instance, the soul of Othello is hardly more distinct from that of Iago than that of Desdemona is shewn to be from AEmilia's; the ambition of Macbeth is as distinct from the ambition of Richard III. as it is from the meekness of Duncan; the real madness of Lear is as different from the feigned madness of Edgar as from the babbling of the fool [...].[273]

In the classical view, through at least Dr. Johnson, poetry "holds a mirror up to nature".[274] The Romantics began to shift the focus to the role of the imagination.[275] In common with his Romantic contemporaries, Hazlitt focuses on how, to communicate the meaning of the play, Shakespeare's imagination,[276] by the medium of poetry, stimulates the reader's or audience's imagination.[277] Several times, Hazlitt observes how Shakespeare by this imaginative construction seemed to become each character in turn. For example, in "Antony and Cleopatra" he stops to observe, "The characters breathe, move, and live. Shakespear [...] becomes them, and speaks and acts for them."[278] And in "Henry IV": "He appears to have been all the characters, and in all the situations he describes."[279]

We as readers or audience appreciate the characters by the force of our imagination's seeming to participate in the scene, as if we were present during such an event in real life. Commenting on the scene in Julius Caesar where Caesar confides to Marc Antony his apprehensions about Cassius, Hazlitt writes: "We know hardly any passage more expressive of the genius of Shakespeare than this. It is as if he had been actually present, had known the different characters and what they thought of one another, and had taken down what he heard and saw, their looks, words, and gestures, just as they happened."[280] In "Hamlet", he observes that "the characters think and speak and act just as they might do, if left entirely to themselves. [...] The whole play is an exact transcript of what might be supposed to have taken place at the court of Denmark [...]."[83]

In "Troilus and Cressida", by a comparison with Chaucer's method of depicting character, he explains in detail how Shakespeare's idea of "character" is not fixed, and Shakespeare shows the characters not only by their own behaviour but as they view and react to one another.[281] Likewise, Shakespeare's attention was not merely to habitual outward behaviour, but to the most transitory, fleeting inward impressions. "Shakespear exhibited [...] not only what things are in themselves, but whatever they might seem to be, their different reflections, their endless combinations."[282]

At times, Shakespeare's illumination of his characters' inner life was so strong that Hazlitt believed no stage presentation could do justice to Shakespeare's conception. In "Lear" he approvingly quotes his friend Charles Lamb's argument that, in general, Shakespeare's plays are unsuited for the stage. The thought crops up repeatedly that "[t]he stage is not in general the best place to study our author's characters in."[283] And elsewhere, "Poetry and the stage do not agree well together."[235] In such statements, he approached the position of Lamb (to whom he dedicated Characters of Shakespear's Plays), who felt that no stage presentation could do justice to Shakespearean drama, that the artifice of the stage interposes a barrier between the author's conception and the audience's imagination.[284] As critic John Mahoney put it, to both Lamb and Hazlitt, "the performance of Shakespeare in a theatre must always be disappointing to an extent because the slightest departure from the vision conjured by the imagination is so immediately detected and so quickly a source of aesthetic displeasure."[285]

Certain plays in particular fall into the category of those unfitted for the stage, for example, A Midsummer Night's Dream and Hamlet. Particularly in the greatest tragedies, this inner focus is so strong that Hazlitt again advances beyond the idea of individual character to that of the "logic of passion"[102]—powerful emotions experienced interactively, illuminating our common human nature. This idea is developed in Hazlitt's accounts of King Lear, Othello, and Macbeth.[101]

At least partly explaining why both Lamb and Hazlitt felt the inadequacy of Shakespearean stage performances was that the theatres themselves were huge and gaudy, audiences were noisy and unmannerly,[286] and dramatic presentations in the early nineteenth century were sensationalistic, laden with artificial and showy props.[287] In addition, unless one sat down in the pit, one could easily miss the subtleties of the actors' facial and vocal expressions.[288]

For all his insistence that justice could not be done to Shakespeare's plays on stage, Hazlitt frequently made exceptions. A devoted playgoer from an early age, and now a drama critic, he relished many of the stage performances he had witnessed. In some cases, as with Edmund Kean (to whom he refers frequently in this book, usually with admiration) and Sarah Siddons (he could "conceive of nothing grander" than her performance as Lady Macbeth),[289] their interpretations of roles in Shakespearean drama left indelible impressions, extending his ideas of the potential of the characters represented. For example, in "Romeo and Juliet" he proclaims, "Perhaps one of the finest pieces of acting that ever was witnessed on the stage, is Mr. Kean's manner of doing this scene [when Romeo is banished] [...] He treads close indeed upon the genius of his author."[290]

Hazlitt throughout his book seems to waver between these two opinions—that frequently the actors offer the best interpretations of Shakespeare, and that no view of Shakespeare on stage can match the rich experience of reading the plays—without acknowledging the apparent contradiction.[8]

Some plays he considered to be especially suitable for the stage, such as The Winter's Tale, which he declares to be "one of the best-acting of our author's plays".[237] Here he recalls some acting triumphs he had witnessed long ago: "Mrs. Siddons played Hermione, and in the last scene acted the painted statue to the life—with true monumental dignity and noble passion; Mr. Kemble, in Leontes, worked himself up into a very fine classical phrensy; and Bannister, as Autolycus, roared as loud for pity as a sturdy beggar could do who felt none of the pain he counterfeited, and was sound of wind and limb."[238]

Richard III for Hazlitt was another that was "properly a stage-play", and in that chapter "criticise[s] it chiefly with a reference to the manner in which we have seen it performed",[226] and then compares various actors' interpretations of the character of King Richard: "If Mr. Kean does not entirely succeed in concentrating all the lines of the character, as drawn by Shakespear [...] [h]e is more refined than Cooke; more bold, varied, and original than Kemble in the same character."[291]

Hazlitt also objects to the way Richard III was frequently edited for the stage at that time. "To make room for [...] worse than needless additions" from other plays, often not by Shakespeare, "many of the most striking passages in the real play have been omitted by the foppery and ignorance of the prompt-book critics."[292] Viewing it as the stage presentation of a story, he finds this play is damaged by these manipulations, as, in Shakespeare's original, the "arrangement and developement of the story, and the mutual contrast and combination of the dramatis personae, are in general as finely managed as the developement of the characters or the expression of the passions."[293] He remarks on another kind of editing—what would soon become known as "Bowdlerisation"—in the treatment of a passage in Romeo and Juliet in which the frank speech of Juliet alarmed the prudes of his day. He quotes the passage, commenting that "we have no doubt that it has been expunged from the Family Shakespear."[294]

Story development and "the business of the plot"[44] are scrutinised in several chapters. "Shakespear excelled in the openings of his plays: that of Macbeth is the most striking of any."[118] Commenting on the "developement of the catastrophe" in Cymbeline, he takes occasion to note that the contention of Dr. Johnson that "Shakespear was generally inattentive to the winding-up of his plots", is so far from being true that in King Lear, Romeo and Juliet, Macbeth, Othello, and Hamlet, among "other plays of less moment [...] the last act is crowded with decisive events brought about by natural and striking means."[44] Hazlitt will frequently offer a brief sketch of the story[295] and stop to note particular excellences of Shakespeare's technique. He thus finds the "whole of the trial scene" in The Merchant of Venice to be "a master-piece of dramatic skill."[296]

Occasionally Hazlitt also discusses the plays from yet other perspectives. Shakespeare's reliance on earlier source material comes into consideration in "Coriolanus"[297] and "All's Well that Ends Well"[298] in particular. Repeatedly, Hazlitt focuses on scenes as they were staged. In the words of Arthur Eastman, he "reads the plays like a director, quick to detect cues as to motion, gesture, costume."[299] Remarking on Hazlitt's "theatrical sense", Eastman says that "it's not simply the physical that Hazlitt has in mind—it's the whole interrelationship of one person with another, one mind with other minds—presences both physical and psychological upon a stage."[271]

In line with Schlegel, more than with any previous English-language critic (except Coleridge, who also followed Schlegel), Hazlitt found "unity" in Shakespeare's plays not in their observing the traditional classical unities of time, place, and action, but in their unity of theme.[300] His most complete elaboration of this idea is in his chapter on Antony and Cleopatra:

The jealous attention which has been paid to the unities both of time and place has taken away the principle of perspective in the drama, and all the interest which objects derive from distance, from contrast, from privation, from change of fortune, from long-cherished passion; and contrasts our view of life from a strange and romantic dream, long, obscure, and infinite, into a smartly contested, three hours' inaugural disputation on its merits by the different candidates for theatrical applause.[301]

In the discussion of Macbeth, it is Macbeth's unity of character that is significant.[302] In many chapters, he emphasises the dominant mood, a unifying theme, the "character" of the play as a whole.[303] In, again, Macbeth, the entire play "is done upon a stronger and more systematic principle of contrast than any other of Shakespear's plays."[304] He notes that "a certain tender gloom overspreads the whole" of Cymbeline.[31] Romeo and Juliet shows "the whole progress of human life" in which "one generation pushes another off the stage."[215] Reading A Midsummer Night's Dream "is like wandering in a grove by moonlight: the descriptions breathe a sweetness like odours thrown from beds of flowers."[305]

Another earlier criticism of Shakespeare, that his writing was not "moral", was still alive in Hazlitt's day. Coleridge frequently emphasised the immorality of characters like Falstaff. To Hazlitt, this was entirely the wrong approach to take to morality in the medium of dramatic poetry,[90] and he stops from time to time to comment on Shakespeare's morality. In considering Hamlet, for example, he declares that the character of Hamlet should not be judged by ordinary moral rules. "The ethical delineations of" Shakespeare "do not exhibit the drab-coloured quakerism of morality."[88] In "Measure for Measure" he remarks that Shakespeare's morality is to be judged as that of nature itself: "He taught what he had learnt from her. He shewed the greatest knowledge of humanity with the greatest fellow-feeling for it."[201] Shakespeare's "talent consisted in sympathy with human nature, in all its shapes, degrees, depressions, and elevations",[200] and this attitude could be considered immoral only if one considers morality to be "made up of antipathies".[306]

Scattered throughout the chapters are more general critical discussions, such as that on tragedy in the essay "Othello", comedy in "Twelfth Night", and the value for human life of poetry in general, in "Lear", among many others.[307] Along the way, Hazlitt intersperses lengthy quotations from the plays, sharing with the reader poetic passages he thought particularly excellent. This practice resembled the by then common practice of collecting long extracts from the plays as the "beauties" of Shakespeare.[295] Hazlitt, however, also adds critical commentary (though often far less extensive than would become the practice in later years),[308] with the quotations illustrating particular points about the plays as well as sharing with his readers what he thought worthy of attention.[308] All this, done as no one had before, made Characters of Shakespear's Plays the first handbook for the study and appreciation of all of Shakespeare's plays.[309]

Characters of Shakespear's Plays was Hazlitt's most successful book. As he had circulated advance copies before publication, it was noticed favourably before it formally appeared on 9 July 1817. Leigh Hunt proclaimed enthusiastically that "it is the least of all its praises to say that it must inevitably supersede the dogmatical and half-informed criticisms of Johnson."[310]

After publication, not all of the reaction was this positive. The Tory British Critic sniped that the book was "stuffed with dull, common-place, Jacobin declamation",[311] and The Quarterly Review, with the same political bias, rebuked Hazlitt for his uncomplimentary portrayal of King Henry VIII.[312] But for the most part, the praise continued. Hunt, in a fuller review in The Examiner, applauded not only the author's enthusiasm  "but the very striking susceptibility with which he changes his own humour and manner according to the nature of the play he comes upon; like a spectator in a theatre, who accompanies the turns of the actor's face with his own."[313] John Hamilton Reynolds, reviewing it in The Champion, went so far as to claim that "This is the only work ever written on Shakespeare that can be deemed worthy of Shakespeare".[314]

The first edition sold out in six weeks. It was only some months afterward that the voice of Francis Jeffrey, the highly respected editor of The Edinburgh Review, was heard. Jeffrey began by expressing reservations: this is not a book of great learning and less a book of criticism than of appreciation. And yet, Jeffrey concedes, the "appreciation" is of the highest kind, and he is "not [...] much inclined to disagree with" Hazlitt "after reading his eloquent exposition" of the points he makes about Shakespeare. "The book [...] is written less to tell the reader what Mr. H. knows about Shakespeare or his writings, than to explain to them what he feels about them—and why he feels so—and thinks that all who profess to love poetry should feel so likewise." While Characters does not "show extraordinary knowledge of [Shakespeare's] production" it nevertheless shows "very considerable originality and genius."[315]

On 30 May 1818, a second edition appeared, this time published by Taylor and Hessey. At first this sold well. At that time, however, literary criticism was subject to exceptionally strong political influences.[316] In particular, the most unscrupulous of the Tory periodicals did not hesitate to indulge in barefaced lies to discredit adherents of what they considered unacceptable political views.[317] Hazlitt, never reticent about criticising kings or government ministers, soon became a target. Only a little more than a week had passed when the Quarterly Review "delivered a diabolical notice of Characters of Shakespeare's Plays—possibly by its editor, William Gifford."[318] (It could have actually been by a certain John Russell, writing anonymously; but Hazlitt laid the blame on Gifford, who was responsible for the journal's contents and may have encouraged Russell.)[317] Gifford, or Russell, sliding from literary criticism into character assassination, wrote:

We should not have condescended to notice the senseless and wicked sophistry of this writer [...] had we not considered him as one of the representatives of a class of men by whom literature is more than at any former period disgraced [...] it might not be unprofitable to show how small a portion of talent and literature was necessary for carrying on the trade of sedition. [Hazlitt had dared to criticise the character of King Henry VIII.] The few specimens which we have selected of his ethics and his criticism are more than sufficient to prove that Mr. Hazlitt's knowledge of Shakespeare and the English language is exactly on a par with the purity of his morals and the depth of his understanding.[319]

Sales completely dried up. Hazlitt got the chronology a bit wrong but was otherwise not exaggerating when he wrote in 1821:

Taylor and Hessey told me that they had sold nearly two editions of the Characters of Shakespear's Plays in about three months, but that after the Quarterly Review of them came out, they never sold another copy.[320]

The attacks in the Tory periodicals, soon extended to other works by Hazlitt, killed not merely the sales of Characters of Shakespear's Plays but, as far as much of the general public was concerned, his reputation as a literary critic.[321]

Though the influence of Hazlitt's only full-length treatment of Shakespeare somewhat receded, it did not completely die out. Hazlitt's son and grandson brought out editions of Hazlitt's works later in the century. His miscellaneous and familiar essays were read, and Hazlitt was commended as a stylist by a discerning few. As a critic, though he had passed out of the public eye, an even more select few understood how high a place he deserved in the ranking of literary critics.[322] William Makepeace Thackeray, for example, praised Hazlitt in 1844 as "one of the keenest and brightest critics that ever lived."[323] Another rare exception was the Scottish journalist Alexander Ireland, who in a brief memoir of Hazlitt in 1889 wrote that Hazlitt's book on Shakespeare, "although it professes to be dramatic criticism, is in reality a discourse on the philosophy of life and human nature, more suggestive than many approved treatises expressly devoted to that subject."[324]

For the most part, although Hazlitt continued to be read and his influence was to a degree felt, he was throughout most of the remainder of the nineteenth century infrequently cited as a critic.[325]

Around the turn of the twentieth century, the influence of Characters began to be exerted more explicitly, notably in the studies of critic A.C. Bradley, who approvingly adopted Hazlitt's explanation of the character of Iago. At about this time, George Saintsbury, who wrote a comprehensive history of English criticism (finished in 1904), recorded his extreme distaste for Hazlitt's character, and, as noted by critic Elisabeth Schneider, found his writings "filled with vast ignorance, errors, prejudice, and an unpleasantness of temper amounting almost to insanity".[326] Yet he also ranked Hazlitt high as a critic, among the greatest in the language. Characters he placed lower than some of Hazlitt's other critical works; yet he allowed that, aside from such "outbursts" as his railing against the historical King Henry V,[327] and his over-reliance on quotation from Schlegel, Characters of Shakespear's Plays is filled with much that is admirable, notably Hazlitt's comparison of Chaucer's and Shakespeare's characterisation and his observation that Shakespeare "has no prejudices for or against his characters". Saintsbury found Hazlitt's critical judgements sound as a rule, and he thought that the characterisations of Falstaff and Shylock were "masterpieces".[328]

Even as the "character" critics began to fall out of favour, and Hazlitt, who was lumped together with them, was also pushed aside, some influence remained. Hazlitt's general approach to Shakespeare's plays, in conveying the prevailing mood, the character of the play itself, had its influence on later twentieth-century critics, like G. Wilson Knight.[329] Other major Shakespeareans, like John Dover Wilson, would occasionally refer approvingly to one of Hazlitt's insights or notable passages, such as the characterisation of Falstaff.[72]

Hazlitt's Shakespearean criticism continued to find some acceptance from then on, yet a stigma still hung about his character, and his criticism was often judged to be overly emotional and "impressionistic". This attitude changed only gradually.[330] In 1955, René Wellek, in his history of literary criticism in all Western culture for the previous two centuries, largely supported these earlier views. Characters, to him, centres excessively on Shakespeare's characters and, worse, Hazlitt "confuses fiction and reality" and discusses fictional characters as though they were real people.[331] Yet he also notes, a half-century after Saintsbury, and following Schneider's lead, that for all of Hazlitt's impressionism, "there is more theory in Hazlitt than is generally realised."[332] He also thought that Hazlitt shows considerable "psychological acumen" in explaining certain types of characters, such as Iago, and that Hazlitt's "character sketch of Iago is superior to Coleridge's".[333] He also praises Hazlitt's freedom, in Characters and elsewhere, from "the defects which infected his nearest critical rivals, Johnson and Coleridge: chauvinism, prudery, and unctuous sermonising. [...] He is free of the prudery which in his day pervaded English culture."[334]

Contemporaneously, Walter Jackson Bate, a critic specialising in the English Romantic period, voiced his approval of Hazlitt's Shakespearean criticism, seen in the context of that of other Romantics. "Like Coleridge [...] or [...] Keats", wrote Bate, "Hazlitt had the characteristic romantic delight in Shakespeare's ability to unveil character in a single passage or even a single line—in 'flashes of passion' that offer a 'revelation as it were of the whole context of our being.'"[335]

More attention soon came to Hazlitt's book. Lionel Trilling was the first critic to recognise the importance of Hazlitt's radically new idea about poetry as expressed in his essay on Coriolanus.[336] Herschel Baker in 1962 noted that the best parts of Hazlitt's book, such as the "stirring essays on Othello and Macbeth", place "Hazlitt near the top of those who have written greatly on the greatest of all writers."[337]

In 1968, Arthur M. Eastman published a retrospective study of 350 years of Shakespearean criticism. At that time, it still seemed necessary to apologise for including Hazlitt among the major Shakespearean critics of his age. But in A Short History of Shakespearean Criticism, Eastman finally concludes that, although much of what Hazlitt says about Shakespeare is not original, it "is well enough said to find a place in the story."[299]

Before Eastman finishes, however, he enumerates several things that Hazlitt did formulate in an original manner. Besides such memorable expressions as "It is we who are Hamlet", Hazlitt, like no critic before him, was supremely attentive to "the whole interrelationship of one person with another, one mind with other minds—presences both physical and psychological upon a stage."[271] With this focus on what Hazlitt had to say about Shakespeare's stagecraft and the way his plays were acted, Eastman thus rescued him from the opprobrium of being associated, in the most superficial way, with the "character" critics. Differing from his contemporaries Lamb and Coleridge, "Hazlitt [...] brings to Shakespeare both a drama critic's sense of the plays as theatre and a closet critic's sense that the theatre of the mind so far surpasses that of the stage that certain of the plays can only be acted there."[338]

Eastman also points to Hazlitt's focus on the underlying unity of the plays. Hazlitt may not have done this as well as Coleridge (who, Eastman thought, was better at suggesting avenues of approach for others to find unity in Shakespeare's plays), "Yet the demonstrations of unity in Cymbeline and Othello and King Lear make us see what otherwise we might not."[339] Eastman also rescues Hazlitt's political commentary, which, however abrasive it might be, "opens such questions" for general discussion, "so that the politics of the plays enters into the arena of interpretation in a new and dignified way."[340]

Overall, Eastman concludes, despite the book's many shortcomings, Characters of Shakespear's Plays was the "best handbook" of its century for the study of Shakespeare's plays.[341]

It remained for John Kinnaird in his 1978 full-length study of Hazlitt as thinker and critic to reconcile Hazlitt as "character" critic with Hazlitt as drama critic. Hazlitt was a character critic to an extent; but he was also a dramatic critic who paid attention to staging and dramatic form.[342] And even his character criticism transcended the focus on individual characters to create "a larger study of the ways of dramatic imagination".[146] In the course of his study of Shakespeare, Hazlitt, as Kinnaird points out, also shows how it is Shakespeare's "art" that enables him to represent "nature", dismissing the older critical view that Shakespeare was a "child of nature" but deficient in "art".[146]

Kinnaird further delves into the ideas in Characters of Shakespear's Plays, especially that of "power" as involved in Shakespeare's plays and as investigated by Hazlitt, not only the power in physical force but the power of imagination in sympathising with physical force, which at times can overcome our will to the good. He explores Hazlitt's accounts of Shakespeare's tragedies—Macbeth, Hamlet, Othello, King Lear, and especially Coriolanus—where he shows that Hazlitt reveals that our love of power in sympathising with what can involve evil can overcome the human desire for the good. This, Kinnaird points out, has serious implications in considering the meaning and purpose of tragic literature in general.[343]

Along the way, Kinnaird notes the influence of Characters on later Shakespearean criticism, including that of A.C. Bradley,[162] G. Wilson Knight,[344] and C.L. Barber.[345]

Hazlitt, concludes, Kinnaird, was too often misunderstood and dismissed as no more than a "character" critic. But his contribution to Shakespeare studies was much broader and deeper than that, and, despite problems with some of Hazlitt's own theories,[346] Characters of Shakespear's Plays was a "seminal" work.[22]

By this time, a revival of interest in Hazlitt was well under way. Only a few years later, in 1983, in his study of Hazlitt as critic, David Bromwich considers at length some issues involving Characters of Shakespear's Plays. Against some allegations to the contrary in earlier studies of Hazlitt, Bromwich concludes that Hazlitt borrowed little from Coleridge,[347] and he presents several contrasts in their critical views, particularly about Shakespeare, as evidence. In extended discussions of Hazlitt's critical treatment of the character of Iago in Othello,[348] of Shylock in The Merchant of Venice,[349] of Caliban in The Tempest,[350] of Hamlet,[87] and, at great length, of Coriolanus,[351] he uses the contrast between Coleridge's criticism and Hazlitt's to highlight the essential originality of Hazlitt's critical stance, and he observes that Hazlitt's views frequently provide a bracing alternative to Coleridge's.[90] He also delves into the issue of Hazlitt's influence on Keats partly by means of Characters, particularly the chapter on King Lear,[352] and he finds in Hazlitt's comments on Lear interesting contrasts and similarities with the critical views of Wordsworth and Shelley.[112] Building upon the arguments advanced by Kinnaird, Bromwich further challenges the "reductive" notion that Characters was simply a work of "character" criticism.[353]

Sustained by the accelerated revival of interest in Hazlitt toward the close of the twentieth century, the legacy of Characters of Shakespear's Plays has been valued increasingly as well. In 1994 Harold Bloom, in voicing his appreciation of Hazlitt's accounts of Coriolanus and of Edmund in King Lear, ranked Hazlitt second only to Dr. Johnson as an English-language literary critic.[354] He echoed and reinforced that assessment in his 2008 edition of Othello.[355] Other new editions of Shakespeare also look back to Hazlitt's interpretations of his plays.[356] In 2000, Jonathan Arac in The Cambridge History of Literary Criticism placed Hazlitt with Schlegel and Coleridge as distinguished Shakespearean critics of their age and noted his study of Shakespeare as one of the "landmarks that still serve as points of departure for fresh thinking nearly two centuries later."[357] In 2006, with Hazlitt's full reinstatement as a major Shakespearean critic, philosopher Colin McGinn based an entire book about Shakespeare's plays on Hazlitt's idea that Shakespeare was a "philosophical" poet.[358]Major and recurring characters from the military science fiction series StarCraft are listed below, organised by respective species and most commonly affiliated faction within the fictional universe. The story of the StarCraft series revolves around interstellar affairs in a distant sector of the galaxy, where three species are vying for supremacy: the Terrans, a highly factionalised future version of humanity; the Protoss, a theocratic race of vast psionic ability; and the Zerg, an insectoid species commanded by a hive mind persona. The latter two of these species were genetically engineered by the Xel'Naga, a fourth species believed extinct. The series was begun with Blizzard Entertainment's 1998 video game StarCraft, and has been expanded with sequels Insurrection, Retribution, Brood War, Ghost, Wings of Liberty, Heart of the Swarm, and Legacy of the Void. The franchise has been further extended with a series of novels, graphic novels, and other works.

Seventeen characters from StarCraft universe appear as playable heroes within crossover multiplayer online battle arena game, Heroes of the Storm. All the three races—Terrans, Protoss, and Zerg—have been represented in the game.

The characters and story of the StarCraft series were created by Chris Metzen[1] and James Phinney.[1] However, as Phinney was not involved in StarCraft: Brood War, Chris Metzen alone is credited for the development of the plot in the expansion.[2] Despite the series success globally, particularly in South Korea, Blizzard Entertainment has not made any major comments regarding the development of the characters and the storyline of the StarCraft series.

However, interviews with two of the voice actors have given a glimpse into small parts of the development process. An interview with Robert Clotworthy, the voice of Jim Raynor in all released StarCraft games to date, has revealed that for the most part the voicing for the characters was done over only a few days in sessions of up to four hours,[3] a fact mirrored in a similar interview with Sarah Kerrigan's actress, Glynnis Talken Campbell.[4] Clotworthy also stated how the concept art for the game usually used for the visual development of characters and locales in games was used by him in order to develop the personality of his character.[3]

Visually, most of the characters and units in the games were developed from artwork by Metzen and Samwise Didier, although at least two other artists—Glenn Rane and Peter Lee—have developed concept art for StarCraft II. It is also implied by some of the authors of the novels that the development of the characters in their books was influenced by Metzen[5][6] as well as Andy Chambers and Evelyn Fredericksen.[7] This is particularly notable for characters later appearing in the games, such as Valerian Mengsk.

Main article: Jim Raynor

Jim Raynor is the primary Terran protagonist and player character in the StarCraft franchise. Raynor is the ubiquitous character of the series, having participated in all critical plot points and military conflicts in the sector, except one. He is also the only character to have established inter-species alliance.

A former colonial marshal on the backwater planet of Mar Sara, Raynor joins Arcturus Mengsk's revolutionaries in their fight against the tyrannical and corrupt Terran Confederacy, where he develops a relationship with Sarah Kerrigan, Mengsk's second in command. However, he quickly comes to realise that Mengsk is far from the force for good when he abandons Kerrigan and the entire population of a planet to die by the hand of the Zerg to satisfy his own thirst for power. Disillusioned and embittered, Raynor deserts Mengsk and becomes a persona non grata in the new Terran Dominion. The situation gets no better when Kerrigan, who was captured by the Zerg, is assimilated into the swarm and becomes one of their most powerful assets. After desertion, Raynor and his forces take part in major combat operations across the sector: He fights alongside the Protoss templar Tassadar in the battle that leads to the fall of the Zerg ruler, the Overmind, and splinters the Zerg into several factions. When the expeditionary forces of United Earth Directorate (UED) arrive in the sector to subjugate it, Raynor, Mengsk, and Kerrigan combine their Terran, Zerg, and Protoss allies to repel the invasion. No sooner than they fall, the alliance shatters.

Four years later, Raynor's rebel movement is contracted by a group called the Moebius Foundation to recover pieces of a Xel'Naga artifact which is ultimately used on Char by a combined force of Raynor's Raiders and Terran Dominion expeditionary fleet to deinfest the Queen of Blades, restoring Sarah Kerrigan's humanity.[8] After her deinfestation, Kerrigan is relentlessly pursued by Arcturus Mengsk; during one such raid Arcturus's Dominion forces capture[9] and allegedly summarily execute the rebel commander.[10] It is later revealed that Raynor was not in fact executed, but held prisoner as a hostage to keep Kerrigan in line.[11] After being freed from his prison Raynor assists Kerrigan as she storms the Dominion capital of Augustgrad on the planet Korhal[12][13] After a showdown with Arcturus Mengsk inside his Palace, Kerrigan manages to gain the upper hand with help from James Raynor, and kills Arcturus by overloading his body with psychic energy, causing him to explode.[14] In Legacy of the Void, Raynor and his Raiders are now part of the Dominion military under the new Emperor Valerian, and with the aid of Artanis and his protoss forces, defend Korhal from an attack by Amon. Joining with Artanis and Kerrigan later on, Raynor watches as Kerrigan ascends to become a Xel'naga and destroys Amon once and for all; two years later, Kerrigan – in human form – visits Raynor at the bar on Mar Sara where he began in Wings of Liberty, and he leaves with her. He is not seen or heard from again.

StarCraft creator Chris Metzen designed Raynor as a rough-living and dangerous man; Clotworthy describes Raynor as a man who other characters "wouldn't mess with".[15] Nevertheless, his depiction is meant to be that of an ordinary man.[16] Critics connected sympathetically with Raynor's plights,[17][18] and GameSpot named him one of the best heroes in video gaming.[19]

Raynor also appears as a playable character in Heroes of the Storm.

Sarah Kerrigan is the primary Zerg protagonist and player character in the StarCraft franchise. Kerrigan serves as the primary antagonist of all but the first and last two games. As "The Primal Queen of Blades", Kerrigan is the de facto leader of the Zerg Swarm and mentor to broodmother Zagara.

Originally a Terran ghost agent for Arcturus Mengsk, she is betrayed and abandoned to the Zerg, who transform her into a Terran/Zerg hybrid with vast psionic powers under the control of the then unknown Amon. Following the death of the Overmind, Kerrigan asserts her independence, striking out at those who betrayed her and who seek to contain her, eventually taking control of the entire Zerg Swarm. Four years later, Kerrigan invades the Dominion in search of a number of Xel'Naga artifacts; these artifacts are instead retrieved by Raynor at the behest of the Moebius Foundation, who assembles them into a device that reverts Kerrigan to a human and releases Amon's grip on her. After her deinfestation, Kerrigan is mercilessly pursued by Arcturus Mengsk, however she successfully escapes Arcturus's Dominion forces. After willingly allowing herself to be reinfested on Zerus,[20] Kerrigan is reborn as the Primal Queen of Blades, after which she successfully reunites the Zerg Swarm and storms the Dominion capital of Augustgrad on the planet Korhal[12] with help from Raynor's Raiders.[13] After a showdown with Arcturus Mengsk inside his Palace, Kerrigan manages to gain the upper hand with help from James Raynor, and kills Arcturus by overloading his body with psychic energy, causing him to explode spectacularly. In the aftermath of her victory, Kerrigan gathers the Swarm and departs in search of Amon.[14]

According to Zeratul, Kerrigan factors prominently into a Xel'Nagan prophecy[21] concerning the Zerg, the Protoss, and the Hybrids.[22] Heart of the Swarm reveals that Kerrigan is the only being powerful enough to stop the fallen Xel'naga Amon, though exactly how is not revealed.[23][24][25] Though originally intended as a throwaway character, Kerrigan grew on the developers, who gave her a greater role in the series.[26] Talken Campbell described Kerrigan's transformation as "going from good girl to bad girl";[27] many of the aspects of Kerrigan's infested character design are inspired by the Greek gorgon Medusa.[28] IGN rated Kerrigan as the fifth most memorable video game villain,[29] while readers of GameSpot put Kerrigan as the most evil video game villain.[30]

During the events of Legacy of the Void, Kerrigan enters into an alliance with Artanis while investigating the Xel'Naga homeworld Ulnar. Some time after Artanis's reclamation of the Protoss homeworld of Aiur, Kerrigan sends a psionic call to Raynor and Artanis for assistance in permanently killing Amon in the Void. During the joint Terran Dominion/Zerg/Protoss assault of the Void, the full context of Zeratul's prophecy about Kerrigan is made clear: Only a fellow Xel'Naga is capable of killing Amon, and only Kerrigan is capable of ascension. With the remainder of the joint armada, Kerrigan is successful in killing Amon during her psychic backlash in the void. During the aftermath, Kerrigan returns to Raynor in human form and disappears.

Kerrigan also appears as a playable character in Heroes of the Storm.

Artanis is the primary Protoss protagonist and player character in the StarCraft franchise. Artanis is a high templar[31] and a military commander introduced in Brood War. Later retcons, particularly with the character's appearances in the novels Queen of Blades and Twilight, have established Artanis as the identity of the nameless 'Executor' for the Protoss campaign in the original StarCraft.

An ambitious leader, Artanis is the youngest templar to achieve the rank of praetor and executor.[31] Artanis holds Tassadar in high esteem and despite being a strong believer in Khalai system, he also holds to the idea of reunification with the Nerazim and Tal'Darim.[31] Artanis is responsible for the initial defense of Aiur alongside Fenix before being dispatched to arrest Tassadar by Aldaris; Artanis, however, sides with Tassadar and helps him defeat the Overmind. Artanis later organizes the evacuation of his now devastated home world of Aiur, and with Zeratul undertakes measures to cleanse the Zerg presence on Shakuras through the use of a Xel'Naga temple.[32] When Sarah Kerrigan's actions result in the deaths of Aldaris, Fenix, and Raszagal, Artanis commands a fleet to bring Kerrigan to justice on Char, and despite allying with both the Dominion and the UED remnants, his forces are defeated by her Zerg.[33] Artanis returns to Shakuras to rebuild the Protoss civilization; with Zeratul having disappeared, Artanis becomes the hierarch of the unified Protoss Protectorate, the Daelaam, but struggles with reintegrating the two estranged branches of his people, with many of the Aiur survivors desiring to retake their home world. He makes a brief appearance in Wings of Liberty in the vision of the Protoss's last stand against the hybrids and their Zerg swarm.

Artanis is the central character of Legacy of the Void, the third and final part of StarCraft II. He leads the Protoss to invade Aiur but as the invasion went on, many Protoss fell under Amon's control. Amon has seized the Khala and is controlling the Protoss via their nerve cords. Artanis initially fell under their control but Zeratul severed his nerve cord, dying in the process. Shortly afterwards, Artanis leaves Aiur behind in the ship Spear of Adun and begins his quest to destroy Amon. Upon repelling Amon from Aiur, Artanis joins Raynor and Kerrigan in destroying Amon and his forces in the void. During the aftermath, Artanis maintains a peaceful alliance with Valerian Mengsk's dominion.

Artanis also appears as a playable character in Heroes of the Storm.

Zeratul is a Nerazim prelate and one of the main Protoss protagonists. A renowned psionic warrior and assassin, Zeratul is somewhat secretive and calculating, but is nevertheless honorable and loyal to his species. He teaches Tassadar how to use dark templar energies and facilitates the final attack on the Overmind by slaying several cerebrates. Following the death of the Overmind, Zeratul tries to put in motion the reunification of the Khalai survivors with the wayward dark templar and unmask the secrets of Samir Duran's experiments. After Duran revealed he had been breeding Protoss-Zerg hybrids for a greater master, Zeratul set out to find Duran's master and his plan, which encompasses all of his activities in the three installments of StarCraft II. In Wings of Liberty, he gives Jim Raynor a crystal with his memories to emphasize the importance of the latter's mission to de-infest Kerrigan. In Heart of the Swarm, he guides Kerrigan to Zerus, the original home of the Zerg, and encourages her to re-infest herself so she can stop Amon, a fallen Xel'naga who is revealed to be the master of Duran and seeks to destroy all life in the Korpulu Sector and remold it in his image. Zeratul also features in the events of Legacy of the Void (originally believed to be the central character, the actual protagonist of the story is Artanis). He appears early on but is killed as he severs Artanis's nerve cords to cut him off from Amon's control. He is described by GameSpot as a "dark warrior who champions the light" and a "willing scapegoat" for his people and ranked in their top ten heroes chart.[34]

The character of Zeratul was created by Blizzard Entertainment's Chris Metzen, with concept art produced by other Blizzard artists such as Samwise Didier.[35] Chris Metzen mentioned that Ritschel died some time during the development of the game, and thus Fred Tatasciore has taken over as the new voice actor.[36][37] Tatasciore described Zeratul as an incredible character, a "Darth Vader" who invests so much in the survival of things, and one of the best characters he has ever played.[37] GameSpot described all the characters in StarCraft as "three-dimensional, full of personality and complexity", and then continued to comment: "Yet even among this star-studded cast, it is Zeratul who stands out as the most noble of heroes, although he is shrouded in a cloak of mystery and aloofness".[36]

Zeratul also appears as a playable character in Heroes of the Storm.

November Annabella Terra,[38] call sign "Nova", a.k.a. "Agent X41822N", is a ghost agent and the protagonist of the StarCraft: Ghost sub-series. Despite the indefinite postponement of the Ghost video game, she appears in Wings of Liberty and Heart of the Swarm, as well as a series of novels, including StarCraft Ghost: Nova and StarCraft Ghost: Spectres. Nova is the subject of her own RTS campaign, Nova Covert Ops, which was released on March 29, 2016.[39]

Nova is the daughter of one of the highly influential Confederate Old Families; despite having unusually high psionic potential her father prevents her from being taken into the Confederate Ghost Program.[40] However, after her family is murdered by an anti-Confederate resistance movement, Nova flees to the undercity of Tarsonis, where she is forced to work as an organized crime enforcer.[41] Nova is rescued during the Zerg invasion of Tarsonis, and ends up in the possession of the newly formed Terran Dominion, who train her as a ghost. At her request, her memories are erased.[42]

She mostly appears in StarCraft series, as a minor antagonist. She initially appeared in StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty, as the source of the mysterious encrypted message that warns Jim Raynor of what Gabriel Tosh is planning: a revival of Project Shadowblade, a program in which Ghosts are given doses of jorium and terrazine to produce Spectres, giving them power but ended the subjects insane. She offers Ghosts for the Raiders to train, in turn she will eliminate the Project Shadowblade and Tosh. If declined, she just warned Raynor and cut off the transmission. In Heart of the Swarm, she led the assault team to capture Kerrigan, Raynor and Prince Valerian. She captured Raynor.

In the Nova Covert Ops, set in postwar Koprulu, she was captured by the mysterious organisation Defenders of Man, a secret group that wants to overthrow Emperor Valerian. She and her Ghost team was captured, used to attack Antiga Prime via psi emitters, and wipes their memories. The team escaped and Nova was captured by Admiral Matt Horner. While holding a feral zerg siege, she was tasked by Horner to assist the defenders. They later met the Emperor, and gave her the Covert Ops Crew, consisting of Reigel and a handful of volunteers. With this, the team tries to foil the Defenders of Man's actions, hesitantly allied with Highlord Alarak to take down Defenders of Man and regain her memories via terrazine, and point him where the Defenders of Man headquartered. After the capture of Carolina Davis, the leader of the Defenders, Alarak attacks them with the Death Fleet. The Dominion and the Defenders joined to repel the invasion. Carolina escapes and tried to destroy the shipyard that houses the Dominion fleet. Nova and her team defeated her, and she killed the Defenders general. Instead of capturing her and the team, Emperor Valerian lets them go.

Nova also appears as a playable character in the crossover video game Heroes of the Storm.[43] In the game, she is a ranged assassin who can ambush enemies from stealth. Her strongest point is her exceptional long-ranged single-target burst damage. In addition, she is able to use "holographic decoys" to confuse and distract the enemy, as one of her three primary abilities. Her baseline ability "ghost protocol" can be activated to instantly grant stealth to Nova. "Triple Tap" and "Precision Strike" with global range, are her two heroic abilities. Nova is one of the six Blizzard characters who appear in the Heroes of the Storm cinematic trailer.[44]

In the team-based shooter Overwatch, there is a Nova skin for the playable character Widowmaker.[45]

The Terrans of the Koprulu sector are descended from the survivors of a disastrous 23rd century colonization mission from Earth. Compared to the Protoss and Zerg, the Terrans are technologically inferior, lacking in genetic-diversity, and highly factionalized, but possesses psionic potential. The seven dominant terran government factions are the Moebius Foundation, the Kel-Morian Combine, the Tarsonis Republic, the Mar Sara Republic, the Terran Dominion (formerly the Terran Confederacy), the Umojan Protectorate, and the United Earth Directorate. Terrans are in a constant state of conflict: whenever they are not caught in the two-front pitched battle crossfire with their alien neighbors' interstellar conflicts, they endure frequent political assassinations, civil wars, and revolutions amongst themselves. Nevertheless, Terran ingenuity and unyielding stubbornness have helped elevate them as the three dominant species of the galaxy.

Matt Horner is the captain of the Raiders' flagship Hyperion and Raynor's second-in-command. Described as "young and idealistic" and guided by strong moral principles, Horner is originally a supporter of Mengsk, but becomes disgusted by Mengsk's deliberate attacks on civilian Confederate targets.[46] Having come to admire Raynor's bravery and loyalty, Horner follows Raynor when he abandons Mengsk's cause, and is keen to strike at the morally bankrupt Terran Dominion. Horner is only an average combatant in personal combat, but is otherwise an excellent pilot and tactician.[46] First introduced in the novel Queen of Blades, Horner commands the Hyperion as it comes under attack from Zerg in orbit of the planet Char and is forced to withdraw from the system, leaving Raynor and a small group of Raiders stranded on the surface; Horner is only able to return several months later to evacuate the survivors.[47] Horner continues in a similar role in Wings of Liberty,[48] acting as Raynor's conscience and trying to keep his commander focused.[49] After the capture of James Raynor by Arcturus's Dominion forces in Heart of the Swarm,[10] Matt Horner assumes temporary command of Raynor's Raiders, leading the rebel movement for much of the game until Raynor's return to the Hyperion after the raid aboard the prison ship Moros.[11] During the events of Legacy of the Void, Horner is now an admiral commanding the Dominion fleet, joining the joint Dominion/protoss defense against Amon and his Moebius Corps forces. After Amon falls, Horner is the Dominion's chief military leader, as he and Emperor Valerian pledge to maintain peace and prosperity for the Dominion.

His actor, Brian Bloom, also voiced a supervillain by the ship's name in the animated series, Avengers Assemble.

Rory Swann is the chief engineer of the Hyperion. Swann came from a family of tech-savvy miners who opened a successful private mining operation on Meinhoff: however, their operation was crushed by ever-rising taxes. Swann lodged a complaint to the Kel-Morian Combine officials and discovered that Tavish Kerr, whose mining operations weren't burdened with taxes, bribed officials to put rival claims out of business through excessive taxation. Swann started a miner's revolt, claiming independence from the Kel-Morian Combine. However, Combine forces arrived and mercilessly crushed the revolt. Swann himself lost an arm, along with many friends, and was only saved because Raynor's Raiders responded to their distress signal. Swann had nothing left, so he joined the Raiders.

Egon Stetmann is a former scientist from the Terran Dominion's science project in Tyrador III that involved a cyborg program using New Folsom Prison inmates as experimental lab rats. He tried to protest the experiments, but his former colleagues silenced him. He uses a virus to escape the facility, then goes into hiding at Deadman's Port. Raynor rescued him from attackers, and he became the Hyperion's engineer/scientist and researcher. After the events of Wings of Liberty, Stetmann was left to set up a research outpost on the planet Bel'Shir, where he went insane due to exposure to terrazine, believing that the planet itself spoke to him.

Tychus J. Findlay is a marine and past associate of Raynor's who becomes affiliated with the Raiders. He appears in the novel Heaven's Devil and in Wings of Liberty as one of the main characters. Findlay is known for his charisma and toughness, and by his friendship with James Raynor. Findlay is introduced in the cinematic trailer for StarCraft II, in which he is shown being encased into powered combat armour. Once he is fully suited up, Mengsk addresses him by name, saying that he is ready for action. "Hell, it’s about time," Findlay responds. Findlay is surrounded by rumours regarding his reputation; on the one hand, he is held as a loyal soldier who risks his life to save his comrades, while on the other, he is regarded as an amoral scoundrel. Findlay and Raynor fought together for the Confederacy several years prior to the events of StarCraft before becoming outlaws; Findlay was eventually captured and incarcerated.[50] By Wings of Liberty, Findlay escapes from prison, tracks down Raynor, and recruits him to work for the secretive Moebius Foundation, where, according to Metzen, Findlay acts as the metaphorical devil on Raynor's shoulder.

After the events of the Campaign, it is revealed that Tychus was only released from his prison by Arcturus Mengsk under the condition that he had to assassinate Sarah Kerrigan. If she dies, Tychus would go free; otherwise, his combat armor would kill him. After Kerrigan is de-infested by the Xel'naga artifact's energy pulse and freed from Amon's control, when Tychus revealed this to Raynor, Raynor blocked Tychus' shot intended for Kerrigan and shot his friend dead.[51]

Tychus also appears as a playable character in Heroes of the Storm.

Gabriel Tosh is a mysterious arms dealer and a "spectre"—an elite ghost agent enhanced through the use of terrazine, a potent psionic reagent. Though originally created for Ghost, Tosh is introduced in the novel Spectres and Wings of Liberty. Metzen describes Tosh as a "Boba Fett-type character"[52] while Andy Chambers feels Tosh is "quasi-Rastafarian".[53] Tosh possesses a nihilistic personality and believes that he must always look out for himself in order to survive.[54] As such, he acts as a foil for the idealistic and honorable character of Matt Horner.[54] Tosh represents an amoral influence on Raynor, and the temptation to cut corners and act like a pirate,[53] although he is not inherently evil.

The player can choose to help him break his former friends out of New Folsom Prison, or ally with Nova to end the project.

Dr. Ariel Hanson is a scientist who becomes associated with Raynor's Raiders after her home colony on the planet Agria is invaded by Zerg in Wings of Liberty. A selfless and altruistic individual, she mainly wishes for life to return to normal. She is considered to be the moral opposite of Tychus Findlay, acting as a metaphorical angel on Raynor's shoulder,[51] and represents a positive moral influence on Raynor. Originally designed as a male character, Hanson was changed in development to female to act as a love interest for Raynor, albeit limited by Raynor's status as a mercenary and fugitive, and moreover the fact that Raynor is still trying to sort himself out in relation to Sarah Kerrigan.[52] In the course of the campaign the player discovers that the Zerg infestation had spread to Agria, and the Protoss had dispatched a fleet to purify the planet as a result. The player can help her colony by eliminating the Protoss mothership, which ends in her staying behind and continuing research for a cure to Zerg infestation. Alternatively, if the player chooses to purify the colony themselves, she will end up infested while desperately researching a cure, forcing Raynor to kill her.

Arcturus Mengsk was the emperor of the Terran Dominion, which presided over the majority of the Terrans in the Koprulu Sector. The main antagonist of the series, he is voiced by James Harper and is the primary subject of the novel I, Mengsk. Mengsk is extremely intelligent and is capable as both a strategist and tactician. While Mengsk does not empathize with people well, he is highly skilled at oratory and propaganda and possesses a remarkable ability for manipulating other people.

Born on Korhal IV, the scion of a powerful founding family of the Terran Confederacy, Mengsk was a colonel in the Confederate Marine Corps and a veteran of the Guild Wars, who became a successful prospector after war's end. Though trying to distance himself from the actions of his father, a prominent Korhal senator and vocal dissident against the Confederacy, Mengsk became a revolutionary himself when his father, mother, and younger sister were murdered by Confederate assassins. His activities soon spurred the Confederacy to launch a nuclear attack against Korhal, wiping out its population; Mengsk swore vengeance, and formed a revolutionary group he called the Sons of Korhal. Years of open conflict successfully weakened Confederate control over the fringe worlds, during which he recruited followers such as Sarah Kerrigan, Jim Raynor, and Edmund Duke. Raynor and Kerrigan grew uneasy with Mengsk's increasingly extreme methods, namely luring Zerg to attack Confederate targets, leading to Mengsk abandoning Kerrigan to the Zerg on the Confederate capital of Tarsonis (another reason for the latter was Kerrigan had been the assassin who murdered his father). With the destruction of Tarsonis by the Zerg, Mengsk crowned himself emperor and styled himself as a benevolent dictator.

In Brood War, the Dominion is invaded by the United Earth Directorate, and Mengsk narrowly escapes capture with the reluctant help of Raynor. Faced with execution and the destruction of the Dominion as alternatives, Mengsk allies with Kerrigan and Raynor to defeat the UED, but Kerrigan eventually betrays their alliance and delivers a crippling blow to Mengsk's forces. Nevertheless, Mengsk rebuilds, and the Dominion remains the dominant Terran power. In Frontline, many of the stories in the anthology paint Mengsk and the Dominion overall as tyrannical and corrupt, no different from the Confederacy.

In Wings of Liberty, Mengsk and his son Valerian find the Dominion opposed by several rebel and paramilitary groups, including Raynor's Raiders. Mengsk suffers compound setbacks during the game, initially due to the mass invasion of Dominion space by Zerg forces,[55] which catches the Dominion military and Mengsk unprepared,[56] and later from Raynor's Raiders who capture and broadcast proof of Mengsk's war crimes during the events of StarCraft.[57][58] Despite these setbacks, Arcturus manages to overcome these hardships, maintaining his position as Emperor of the Dominion for the remainder of the game. During the events of Heart of the Swarm, Mengsk tries to have Kerrigan killed on several occasions, including issuing an obituary about Raynor. Kerrigan however, successfully reunites the Zerg Swarm and storms the Dominion capital of Augustgrad on the planet Korhal[12] with help from Raynor's Raiders.[13] After the final showdown inside Mengsk's palace, Kerrigan manages to gain the upper hand with help from James Raynor, and kills Mengsk by overloading his body with psychic energy, causing him to explode spectacularly.[14] In the wake of his death, Valerian ascends to the throne.

GameSpy cites Mengsk as a classic example of The Who's "Won't Get Fooled Again" lyrics "meet the new boss, same as the old boss".[53] Mengsk was responsible for the release from prison of Tychus Findlay, with the specific purpose of tailing Jim Raynor and killing Kerrigan; Raynor foils this plan by killing Tychus.

Edmund Duke is ranking officer in first the Confederacy and later the Dominion. Duke also appears in several novels, including Liberty's Crusade, Shadow of the Xel'Naga, and Queen of Blades. A scion of one of the influential Old Families of Confederacy with a long career in the military,[59] Duke is a methodical and experienced tactician,[60] but also as an egotistical and xenophobic man.[61] As a colonel, Duke commands the Alpha Squadron of the Confederate Security Forces, and he is the face of the Confederacy for the player in the early parts of StarCraft. Duke initially leads the defense of Confederate colonies Chau Sara and Mar Sara from the Zerg and the Protoss fleet commanded by Tassadar, for which he is promoted to general.[62]

Duke is later charged with quelling rebellion on the Confederate world of Antiga Prime, but is defeated by Mengsk's forces. When Duke's flagship Norad II is shot down by the Zerg during the battle, Duke is rescued by Raynor on Mengsk's orders in return for the defection of the general and his squadron,[63] and Duke's knowledge is vital to Mengsk's assault on Tarsonis. Mengsk, still skeptical of Duke's loyalty,[64] later dispatches Duke on expeditions to investigate the Zerg on Char and a Xel'Naga artifact on Bhekar Ro in Shadow of the Xel'Naga, engagements that decimate Alpha Squadron.[65] In Brood War, Duke organizes the Dominion's fleet defenses against the United Earth Directorate,[66] and later follows Mengsk into alliance with Kerrigan and her Zerg. However, as part of a surgical strike against the Dominion's military capabilities, Kerrigan has Duke's flagship destroyed, killing the general.[67]

Valerian Mengsk is the son of Arcturus Mengsk and his successor as Emperor of the Terran Dominion. Valerian is first introduced in The Dark Templar Saga series of novels, while his backstory is further developed in I, Mengsk. Valerian was created as Metzen felt that Arcturus' story had been effectively told in StarCraft and Brood War.[68] While Blizzard stipulated Valerian's physical description, The Dark Templar Saga author Christie Golden was given the freedom to develop the character as she wished.[69] A disciple of Japanese martial arts and a keen archaeologist, he is described as "brilliant... and probably a bit arrogant for knowing it".[70] Valerian is particularly interested in Xel'Naga artifacts, which he employs mercenaries and leading archaeologists to retrieve and study. Valerian was raised in secrecy on a number of worlds across the Koprulu Sector during his father's campaign against the Confederacy.[71] While Valerian shares Arcturus' passion for liquors and ancient weapons, his relationship with his father is adversarial due to Arcturus' disdain for both him and his mother in his childhood.

Valerian made his game debut in Wings of Liberty. He is confronted by Jim Raynor, mistaking him for his father Arcturus, aboard the Dominion battlecruiser Bucephalus. Valerian reveals that he is the owner of the Moebius Foundation, the think tank that Raynor had been collecting the pieces of a Xel'Naga artifact for, and claimed that his mission was the same as Raynor's – to rescue Kerrigan.[72] Taking more than half the Dominion fleet, Valerian joins forces with Raynor's Raiders and lays siege to the Zerg stronghold of Char, as part of an effort to prove to the Dominion (and to his father) that he will be worthy to take the emperor's crown after Arcturus.[73] Ultimately, the mission succeeds in de-infesting Kerrigan, but in the aftermath of the battle a disagreement between Arcturus and Valerian over Kerrigan's fate sparks an armed civil war between the Emperor and Prince, leading Valerian and a faction of the Dominion's armed forces loyal to him to seek shelter with Raynor's Raiders.[74]

In Heart of the Swarm, Valerian helps Raynor and his Raiders escape into the Umojan Protectorate, where Kerrigan undergoes extensive testing in a research lab.[75] The lab is discovered and attacked by a Dominion task force, and Valerian and Kerrigan escape on board the Hyperion, the Raiders' flagship. Valerian is nearly psionically strangled by Kerrigan for leaving Raynor behind on the base. Valerian knew that his father would be willing to sacrifice him to destroy Kerrigan, even in spite of Hyperion captain Matt Horner warning the Dominion fleet that he was on board, and so he aided Kerrigan and the Raiders in searching for him.[76] During the final assault against Korhal, Valerian recognized that Arcturus was beyond redemption, and asked only that Kerrigan minimize civilian casualties; Kerrigan thus elected to attend his request, recognizing him as a different man from his father.[77] Kerrigan killed Arcturus shortly thereafter.[14] Following the death of his father and the departure of the Zerg, Valerian assumed the throne and became the new Emperor of the Dominion. He immediately went to work rebuilding the Dominion, and enacted new laws to eliminate the corruption and abuse of power that had occurred during his father's reign. These reforms included abolishing forced military conscription and slave labor. He also reorganized a number of his father's secret projects, such as Project Blackstone.

In Legacy of the Void, not long after his ascension to the throne, Korhal and the rest of the Dominion are assaulted by Moebius Foundation under control of the fallen Xel'Naga, Amon. Alongside Raynor, he does everything in his power to save his people. When Artanis arrives, he aids Raynor and Valerian to repel the Moebius Foundation on Korhal. After Amon has been banished into the Void, Valerian allows Raynor to take the Dominion Fleet to Ulnar in order to help Kerrigan and Artanis to defeat Amon once for all. After Amon's defeat, Valerian has turned the Terran Dominion into a government of peace and prosperity.

In Nova Covert Ops, Valerian has been under pressure from the Defenders of Man, who oppose his rule. Valerian questions Nova when she returned to the Dominion after being missing for some time. Valerian believes her claim, that she didn't betray the Dominion and grants her her own covert ops team to discover what the Defenders of Man are up to. After Nova learns that the Defenders are using psi emitters to lure zerg to Dominion Worlds to discredit him, and learning the identity of their leader, General Davis, Valerian contacts Davis and announces his wish to step down as the Emperor of the Dominion.

General Horace Warfield is put in command of the Dominion forces to fight the second Zerg invasion, in Wings of Liberty. He served in the Confederate military under Arcturus Mengsk and held a higher place among Mengsk's advisors than Edmund Duke, who also abandoned the confederacy. His entire family was killed during the Zerg assault on Tarsonis due to the use of the psi-emitters, about which Warfield is rumoured to have provided extremely valuable intelligence.[78] In Heart of the Swarm, Warfield is defeated by Kerrigan and tells her to let the transports full of wounded troops leave the planet alive, calling her a traitor to humanity and stating that Raynor would be ashamed of her. Kerrigan, furious at the general's comments, executes him but allows the transports to escape.[79]

Gerard DuGalle is the commanding admiral of the United Earth Directorate's expeditionary force to the Koprulu Sector. DuGalle only appears in Brood War and is voiced by Jack Ritschel. Considered the UED's most capable military leader, DuGalle, a Frenchman, is a staunch believer in the UED's mission to pacify the sector and carries out his orders with precision.[80] In Brood War, DuGalle leads the UED as it conquers the Terran Dominion; however, despite his experience, DuGalle believes misinformation planted by former Confederate soldier Samir Duran regarding a psi disruptor, a device that disrupts Zerg communications, on Tarsonis.[81] When DuGalle's lifelong friend Alexei Stukov abandons the fleet, DuGalle allows Duran to assassinate Stukov as a traitor, only realizing his mistake too late. Nevertheless, DuGalle acts to prevent Duran from destroying the psi disruptor and uses it to capture the Zerg Overmind on Char. However, as a result of demoralization, limited manpower, and an alliance of enemies led by Kerrigan, the fleet is eventually pushed back, and when a final attempt to recapture Char fails, DuGalle orders the retreat.[82] Shortly before the UED fleet is overtaken by Zerg and destroyed, DuGalle composes a letter to his wife in which he admits responsibility for his closest friend's death and commits suicide by a gunshot to the head.[83]

Alexei Stukov is the vice admiral and second-in-command of the United Earth Directorate's expeditionary force. He later reappears as one of Kerrigan's lieutenants in the Zerg Swarm in Heart of the Swarm and Legacy of the Void, voiced by Victor Brandt. A man of Russian descent, his military career primarily revolves around secret research, though he is also noted as an excellent tactician.[80] A close friend of DuGalle, Stukov will debate situations with the admiral, but will subordinate himself to his friend's higher rank.[80] Stukov becomes suspicious of the motives of Samir Duran after the latter convinces DuGalle to destroy the psi disruptor.[81] Believing the device to be the UED's best hope to conquer the Zerg, Stukov instead takes the psi disruptor to Braxis, but is tracked down and shot dead by Duran. With his dying breaths, Stukov convinces DuGalle that Duran is a traitor and to keep the psi disruptor running for the UED's assault on the Zerg homeworld of Char.[84] Stukov's body is given a full funeral, and UED propaganda portrays Stukov as a hero, claiming he died in combat on Char.[85]

Stukov is later mysteriously revived by a Zerg cerebrate to make use of him for its own deeds.[86] He is first observed, apparently infested, by pirates raiding a secret science facility in the bonus mission "Deception", a facility that Stukov subsequently destroys. Stukov later appears in another bonus map, "Mercenaries II", in which he hires several mercenary groups to destroy some of his adversaries. In the StarCraft 64 secret mission "Resurrection", Artanis sends a task force headed by Raynor to inject Stukov with an experimental serum; the serum reverses the infestation effects and leaves Stukov healthy, albeit embittered.[87] However, the Protoss cure would prove only temporary, and once Stukov was turned over to the Moebious Foundation for research purposes, the scientists re-infested him in an attempt to replicate the cure, without success. Creative director Andy Chambers regards the resurrection as an experiment by the Zerg,[68] while Metzen notes that Stukov's resurrection had "really interesting hooks".[88] Blizzard's former producer Bill Roper hoped that Stukov's storyline will be developed further,[89] noting that the character would only be reintroduced if Blizzard can "figure out the right way to do it".[88]

An infested incarnation of Alexei Stukov makes a canon appearance in StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm. Following Sarah Kerrigan's transformation on Zerus, Stukov contacts her and tells her about infestation experiments being performed on Skygeirr Platform. According to Stukov, he escaped his Moebius captors after being re-infested and learned that the foundation is secretly breeding Protoss-Zerg hybrids at the request of Arcturus Mengsk. Although not a hybrid himself, Stukov oddly seems to possess an amalgamation of Protoss and Zerg abilities and characteristics, though this likely resulted from his exposure to the Protoss anti-infestation cure. Once the lab breeding the hybrid is destroyed, he realizes that he has no purpose and cannot return to Earth or any Terran faction as an infested human. Kerrigan offers him a position in the Swarm as a leader, and Stukov ultimately decides to remain with the Swarm.

In the epilogue of Legacy of the Void, Stukov joins in the battle against a resurrected Duran, revealed to be a Xel'Naga. Stukov successfully delivers the killing blow to Duran.

Stukov also appears as a playable character in Heroes of the Storm.

Michael Daniel Liberty is a Terran news reporter whose affiliations have varied over time. He hates it when people such as his former editor-in-chief Handy Anderson calls him "Mickey". Liberty is described as being "of normal height and proportions, if a little lanky." He has dirty blond hair that is spattered with lighter striations of gray, which is swept back in a ponytail to cover a bald spot. He has a liking for cigarettes, but keeps trying to quit. A few years after going freelance, Liberty remained the same in physical appearance, apart from an abundance of facial hair.

The Daelaam are the unified Protoss protectorate organization representing all known Protoss kindred, races, castes, and factions. Before the Brood Wars, Protoss society was divided—the Khalai of the Protoss Empire, the exiled Nerazim, the heretic Tal'Darim, and the hibernating Purifiers. Because of the Great War and subsequent Brood War, the former body collapsed and all branches of Protoss were forced to band together in sharing knowledge, integrating technology, and for mutual survival.

The Khala, or "The Path of Ascension", was the religious law of the Protoss, established after an era known as the "Aeon of Strife" that followed the departure of the Xel'Naga. There are four distinct castes: The Khalai, or "The Enlightened Ones", consisted a caste of artists, engineers, and scientists which constituted the majority of Protoss society; the Templar, consisted a caste of militarism, industrialism, and law enforcement charged with exploration and the defense of Protoss interests; the Preservers, consisted a caste of historians, educators, and archivists charged with maintaining the telepathic network that unified Protoss society into the Khalai; and the Judicators, consisted a caste of theologians, politicians, and judiciaries which formed the Conclave ruling class over Protoss society.

Tassadar is a high templar who holds the rank of executor in the Khalai military. He appears in StarCraft and in several novels, most notably Queen of Blades. Tassadar is voiced by Michael Gough in StarCraft, with Michael Dorn playing the part in later appearances. Described as being fascinated with, if somewhat wary of, the dark templar,[91] Tassadar is the commander of the fleet that made first contact with the Terrans by destroying their colony of Chau Sara to contain Zerg infestation. However, Tassadar eventually disregards his orders to continue destroying worlds with no concern for the Terrans, and instead engages the Zerg by conventional means. After tracking the Zerg to their homeworld of Char, he encounters the dark templar Zeratul and Jim Raynor, forging a friendship with the two and learning how to use his psionic powers in conjunction with the powers of the dark templar.

The Khalai government sees Tassadar's consortion with the dark templar as heretical and as a bigger threat to their society than the Zerg invasion of the Protoss homeworld Aiur, sending Aldaris and Artanis to arrest him. Artanis however, along with Fenix, sides with Tassadar, sparking a civil war between Tassadar's followers and the government.[92] The conflict is only ended when Tassadar demonstrates the effectiveness of the dark templar against the Zerg. With Raynor, Zeratul and Fenix, Tassadar breaks through the Zerg defences on Aiur to the Zerg Overmind; Tassadar channels both his own psionic energies and those of the dark templar through the hull of his flagship and crashes it into the Overmind.[93] The resulting discharge of energy destroys the Overmind and transcends Tassadar to a new level of spiritual existence; Metzen refers to this transformation as becoming a "twilight messiah".[68]

By the events of StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty, Tassadar is believed dead by the Protoss, though he has become a legendary figure among them. However, when Zeratul visits the remains of the Overmind in his investigations into the Koprulu Sector's future, Tassadar appears in spirit form and shows him a vision that the Overmind had originally shown him when he destroyed it. This vision foretold the fall of the galaxy to the Zerg Swarm led by the Xel'naga Amon and his Protoss-Zerg hybrids. This Tassadar turns out to be a projection of the Xel'Naga Ouros and not the real Tassadar.

Tassadar also appears as a playable character in Heroes of the Storm.

A templar and an old friend of Tassadar's, Fenix is a powerful and cunning leader, but remains distrustful towards the motives of the ruling judicator caste.[60] Under the command of Aldaris, Fenix helps defend Aiur from the Zerg invasion, but eventually falls in the battle of Antioch when his position is overwhelmed by Zerg and his psi-blades lose power. Nevertheless, Fenix is retrieved and integrated into a dragoon, a mechanical fire support unit designed to allow incapacitated warriors to continue military service.[94] Fenix allies his templar forces with Tassadar's upon the schism between Tassadar and the Protoss government, later leading a task force against the Overmind's outer defenses, facilitating Zeratul's assassination of a number of cerebrates and ultimately the death of the Overmind itself.[95] Over this time, Fenix develops a strong friendship with Tassadar's Terran companion Jim Raynor.

In Brood War, Fenix and Raynor remain behind as a rear guard when the Protoss evacuate the now Zerg-overrun Aiur through a warp gate.[96] They hold it until attacked by United Earth Directorate forces pursuing Arcturus Mengsk, upon which they escape through the gate, disabling it as they depart. With Raynor and Mengsk, Fenix enters into an alliance with Sarah Kerrigan against the UED, even leading the Zerg forces on a raiding mission for resources on Moria.[97] However, after the UED is routed from their position on the Dominion capital world of Korhal, Kerrigan turns on her allies. Though unfazed by Kerrigan's betrayal, Fenix is slain when Kerrigan's Zerg launch a surprise attack against his base camp on Korhal.[98] In StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm, Raynor shows that he still harbors a grudge against Kerrigan for Fenix's death after seeing her willingly become infested again after all his hard work in returning her to human form.

In Legacy of the Void, it is revealed that before Fenix's defeat at Antioch in StarCraft, his personality was cloned and inserted into an experimental mechanical body of ancient Purifiers. This body was locked inside a stasis vault on planet Glacius. Artanis obtained Fenix and with his help he was able to gain the Purifiers as allies against Amon. During the campaign he concludes that despite having Fenix's memories, he was a different being. Because of this, he changed his name to Talandar.

Fenix also appears as a playable character in Heroes of the Storm.

Rohana was one of three grand preservers who helped create the arkships. When the Spear of Adun was reactivated, she served as a councilor to Hierarch Artanis.

Before her stasis aboard the Spear of Adun, Rohana was a driven Protoss who was not afraid to seek out tasks others thought impossible. She displayed strict adherence to tradition, yet was creative when faced with the issues. After she was awakened, Rohana held on to the old ways of the Protoss Empire, openly speaking out against her Nerazim crew, Artanis' Terran allies, and the reawakening of the Purifiers. She served as a reminder of the past, clinging to old traditions and ways, and refusing to cut her connection from the Khala even as Amon continued to possess her, stating knowledge and history was the only thing that brought unity to the Protoss. Though Artanis valued her memories and her ability to see into Amon's thoughts, he began to grow weary of her adherence to the old ways and her objections to his choices, becoming more of a critic than a councilor. Eventually, she came to terms with the Daelaam, and cut herself from the Khala, stating that perhaps history did not need to be recorded with perfect clarity.

Selendis is the executor of the Protoss military following the reunification of the race. The character is introduced in the novel Twilight and in the Wings of Liberty campaign. Selendis is fiercely loyal to her race's ideals and completely dedicated to her responsibilities. A protégée of Artanis,[99] she considers the dark templar to be a threat to her heritage, but she is willing to work beside them. Selendis is particularly eager to reclaim Aiur from the Zerg.[99]

In Wings of Liberty, Selendis leads a force to the planet Haven, where refugees of Meinhoff and Agria have settled after the fall of their old homeworlds, to purge it with fire in order to eradicate a Zerg virus that has infested several refugees. Raynor's Raiders appear and are formally greeted by Selendis as past allies. The player could choose to purge Haven in the Protoss' place while trying to save as many uninfested refugees as possible, or have Raynor side with Ariel Hanson of Agria, who has ideals of being able to create a cure for the Zerg Infestation. In Zeratul's apocalyptic vision, Selendis appears as one of the Protoss heroes who makes their last stand against Zerg and Hybrid forces.

In Legacy of the Void, she serves as the Executor in the invasion of Aiur but falls under Amon's control, like many other Protoss. She leads the golden armada against Artanis's forces, who holds them out long enough for the Keystone to break them free from Amon's control. Under Artanis's urging, Selendis severs her nerve cord and urges her fellow templar to sever their cords as well, permanently freeing them from Amon's grasp.

Aldaris is a member of the ruling judicator caste of Protoss society; in StarCraft he acts as liaison between the player character and the Protoss government. Aldaris is a fanatical believer in the Khala and does not hesitate to judge others through a strict interpretation of its tenets.[60] As a result, he is outraged by Tassadar's association with the dark templar, and following the outbreak of war between the judicator caste and the templar caste, commands the government forces against Tassadar. Aldaris captures Tassadar and puts him on trial for crimes of blasphemy and treason,[100] though Tassadar is freed by Fenix, Raynor, and Zeratul. Aldaris later witnesses the rebels successfully penetrate the Zerg's core defenses, and wishes them luck in their final battle against the Overmind.[101] In Brood War, Aldaris reluctantly allies with the dark templar when the Protoss flee Aiur for Shakuras. However, when Sarah Kerrigan is accepted as an ally by dark templar matriarch Raszagal, Aldaris is furious. While Artanis and Zeratul are absent, he discovers Raszagal is being mentally controlled by Kerrigan and instigates a rebellion amongst the Khalai refugees. When his insurrection is thwarted, the judicator tries to explain his actions to Artanis and Zeratul, but is murdered by Kerrigan before he can reveal her involvement.[102]

Ancient Protoss, a Protoss dragoon, holding the rank of praetor. He was introduced in the StarCraft 64 map, Resurrection IV. Along with Jim Raynor took part in the mission on Braxis to de-infest Alexei Stukov. To date, it is his only appearance.

Karax is a Khalai phasesmith. An expert in weapons, armor, and ships. Karax is one of the most precise of Protoss engineers. Over the course of the war against Amon, he was able to rise above his worker origins, serving as an important part of the war effort. Karax is shorter and stockier than most Protoss. The armor he wears also differs in that it is more functional than ceremonial. Karax was among the Golden Armada when it assaulted Aiur.[1][3] After Amon forced the Protoss into retreat, he guided Hierarch Artanis through the Spear of Adun, explaining its systems and how he had given orders for the Templar in stasis to have their nerve cords removed, as per Amon's corruption of the Khala. He had already been forced to sever his own nerve cords, but had attached cybernetic tentacles to the tips, effectively giving him extra means of physical manipulation.

Urun is the leader of the Auriga Tribe and a member of the Hierarchy. Urun appears in Wings of Liberty leading the remnants of the Protoss air force in battle during the end of the Protoss mini-campaign, fighting against the hybrids and the enslaved Zerg Swarm.

Adun was a Protoss warrior and strategist who led the Templar shortly before the exile of the Nerazim. All Protoss revered him as a hero. Adun's legacy achieved exalted status, and was woven into Protoss lore, language, and culture. En Taro Adun! ("In honor of Adun!") became both a salutation and a battle cry used by the Khalai; Adun Toridas ("May Adun give you sanctuary") became a standard Nerazim expression. Both the Citadel of Adun and the Spear of Adun were named after him. The Zerg, having gained knowledge of Adun's significance to the Protoss, referred to their enemies as "The Children of Adun."

Lasarra was a female Protoss scientist stationed on Kaldir when it was attacked by Sarah Kerrigan, and was captured during the attack on Kaldir at the request of Abathur, who wanted to experiment on her even though it was known that the Protoss could not be infested.. During her time onboard Kerrigan's leviathan, Lasarra interacted with Kerrigan a number of times. Kerrigan tried to justify her actions on Kaldir as self-preservation, but Lasarra is unconvinced and tells her that it is no justification for the killing of innocents.. Eventually, as one of the Protoss ships was able to break through the Zerg blockade, Lasarra was implanted with a special larva and allowed to warp in to that ship. The larva devoured her and then other lifeforms being stored on the ship, evading detection. It eventually transformed into a broodmother, Niadra, which bred a new brood that infested the ship, killing every Protoss on board. Kerrigan later showed some regret over Lasarra's death, as she told Izsha that she did not enjoy having to kill her.

Kaldalis is a Protoss zealot and a close friend of Hierarch Artanis. Kaldalis takes pride in the history of the Protoss and the Khala, though does not express prejudice towards the Nerazim, and believes that driving them away was a sin. A scar runs down his left eye. Kaldalis survived the Zerg conquest of Aiur during the Great War. Afterwards, he joined the Protoss Protectorate led by Hierarch Artanis. Kaldalis was impressed by Artanis' vision of a unified Protoss society, the Daelaam, which incorporate the cultures of Khalai, Nerazim, Tal'Darim, and Purifiers.

Praetor Karass was a Protoss high templar. His mastery of psionic powers was considered legendary. On the eve of the Second Great War, Karass and his troops journeyed to Ulaan in pursuit of Kerrigan. There he met the Prelate Zeratul; the dark templar was seeking information on the hybrids. The praetor put himself at Zeratul's disposal, and the pair broke through Zerg patrols and found the prophecy Zeratul and Kerrigan sought. Kerrigan attacked the outnumbered Protoss shortly afterward. Karass instructed Zeratul to escape with the information; the praetor and his troops proceeded to buy Zeratul time with their lives. The dark templar reluctantly withdrew aboard Void Seeker, and swore that Karass' sacrifice would not be in vain.

Talis was a Protoss Praetor. She was seen in the prologue of the Legacy of the Void, when Zeratul helped her defeat Amon's forces. She defends the Xel'Naga temple from both Hybrid and Tal'Darim attacks, allowing Zeratul to escape, before dying from countless void shades and Hybrid attacking her.

The Nerazim, or the "Dark Templar", were exiled from Aiur for refusing to submit to the communal will of the Khala. They are warriors who strike from the shadows, and remain dedicated defenders of their people despite their banishment. After the devastation of Aiur in StarCraft, the Nerazim took in their Khalai brethren on their shadowy homeworld of Shakuras, where both sides work to rebuild Protoss society.

Raszagal was the matriarch of the Nerazim on Shakuras, and mother to Vorazun. The character appears in Brood War and in the novel Shadow Hunters. Described as one of the oldest living Protoss and imbued with tremendous psychic powers,[31] she is one of the few to clearly remember the Protoss homeworld from before the exile of the Nerazim. During her youth, Raszagal was important in ensuring the dark templar were only exiled, rather than exterminated. In Brood War, Raszagal directs Zeratul and Artanis to cleanse the Zerg from Shakuras and welcomes Sarah Kerrigan as an ally in their mission. This spurs Aldaris to rebellion; Raszagal consequently orders his death.[103] Kerrigan and Samir Duran later kidnap Raszagal from Shakuras, using her to blackmail Zeratul into killing the second Overmind. It quickly becomes apparent that Kerrigan has mentally subverted Raszagal and has been using her to manipulate events from the beginning.[104] Zeratul captures Raszagal, but is unable to hold off the Zerg forces long enough to escape. Realizing that the matriarch is beyond redemption from Kerrigan's influence, Zeratul kills Raszagal. Raszagal's mind is freed by the lethal blow, and she dies thanking Zeratul for releasing her, naming him as her successor as leader of the dark templar.[105]

Vorazun is a Nerazim matriarch, daughter to Raszagal, second-in-command to Artanis, and the leader of the surviving Nerazim on Shakuras. She is a skilled warrior, and dedicated to her people. Vorazun is deeply committed to the individuality and culture of her people. While she originally feared the cultural change the Daelaam was bringing to her people, she nonetheless remained committed to its ideals in a unified Protoss nation.

Vorazun had a complicated relationship with Artanis, even before her ascension to Matriarch. Artanis originally believed she was against his vision on unification. Despite Vorazun's many objections, she nominated Artanis for the role of Hierarch of the Daelaam. By the End War, Vorazun gained a greater deal of respect for Artanis. After the destruction of Shakuras and witnessing him survive against countless foes alone, she claimed Artanis had partaken and completed the "Shadow Walk", becoming Dark Templar. She also comforted Artanis after he killed Zeratul while under Amon's control.

Vorazun had accused Zeratul of treasion against the Nerazim for his role in the death of her mother. Despite Artanis' protests regarding Raszagal's corruption by Kerrigan, she stated she would always hold Zeratul in contempt. It wasn't until following Zeratul's prophecy that lead to Ulnar, she admitted that he was closer to the truth than anyone, and after finally realizing that Zeratul's dedication to the Xel'naga prophecy gave the Protoss hope, she vowed to honor him with Artanis.

Mohandar is a prelate within the Nerazim, the elderly leader of the Nerazim and member of the Hierarchy. In the Dark Templar Saga, Mohandar attends a meeting of the Hierarchy to discuss Zamara, a missing preserver, Ulrezaj, a powerful dark archon and old enemy of the Khalai. Mohandar appears in Zeratul's apocalyptic vision at the end of the Protoss mini-campaign in Wings of Liberty. Mohandar appears in the StarCraft II short story Children of the Void, set before Legacy of the Void. He was killed while quelling a Nerazim uprising in the capital city of Talematros with Matriarch Vorazun.[106]

Ulrezaj is a Nerazim rebel who believes that the Khalai Protoss should either be removed from Shakuras or exterminated. He is introduced in the downloadable Brood War campaign "Enslavers: Dark Vengeance", and later appears as the antagonist of the novels Shadow Hunters and Twilight. Brought up as a scholar on the moon of Ehlna, Ulrezaj begins to abuse his position by learning from prohibited sources of information. Resenting the exile of the dark templar from Aiur, he abandons his career and takes up arms against the Khalai Protoss as they establish themselves on Shakuras.[107] He later uses the knowledge learned from his early days to become a dark archon, an immensely powerful psionic being created by several Protoss merging. Allying with a Terran smuggler, Alan Schezar, Ulrezaj moves an orbital base over Shakuras; Ulrezaj uses Schezar's resources to mutate Zerg to attack the Khalai Protoss, while an EMP device disables Shakuras' power grid. Though defeated by Zeratul's forces, Ulrezaj escapes.[108]

Ulrezaj reappears several years later, residing on Aiur where he is manipulating a faction of Protoss survivors who were not evacuated. Ulrezaj uses these Protoss to attempt to capture a Terran archaeologist, Jacob Ramsey, who has the powerful mind of a Protoss archivist, Zamara, residing in his own mind; their failure to do so leads to Ulrezaj personally trying to take Ramsey, but the archaeologist escapes through a warp gate while both Zerg and Valerian Mengsk's forces also attempt to capture him. Ulrezaj traces Ramsey to Ehlna, breaking through the defenses of both the Protoss and the Dominion. However, Zamara uses the last of her energy to lock Ulrezaj's mind into a storage crystal, sacrificing herself to keep Ulrezaj trapped.

The Tal'Darim, referred to as "the Forged" or "the Chosen" are a fanatical sect of Protoss cut off from the Khala, who actively worship the Xel'Naga as gods. They are one of the antagonists in every game, and serve Amon, to rebuild the universe in his name. However, they become allies with Artanis after Alarak defeats Ma'Lash in the rite of Rak'Shir and becomes leader, vowing to bring down Amon.

Alarak is a central figure of the Tal'Darim in the service of Amon. He was first described in the short story Ascension, one of the lead-up short stories before the release of Legacy of the Void. In the story, he holds the title of Fourth Ascendant, a minor leader in the Tal'Darim hierarchy, known as the "Chain of Ascension"; one can only advance in rank through Rak'Shir, a ritual trial by combat of their immediate superior. When the First Ascendant, Nuroka, challenges Highlord Ma'lash for leadership of the Tal'Darim, Alarak remains neutral, until Ma'lash seemed on the brink of defeat; he then declared for him, offering his psionic strength, allowing Ma'lash to defeat Nuroka. With the First, Second, and Third Ascendants claimed in the battle, Alarak is named First Ascendant; however, Ma'lash is wary, and threatens a slow and painful death if Alarak betrays him.

Throughout the ritual, Alarak is filled with doubts as to Amon's goals, which becomes a betrayal as Amon begins to phase out the Tal'Darim and other "mortal" forces, relying more and more on his hybrid. Alarak thus forms an alliance with Artanis, who pledges to aid in bringing down Ma'lash and removing the Tal'Darim from Amon's service. With the aid of Artanis' forces, Alarak challenges Ma'lash to Rak'Shir and defeats him, becoming the new Highlord of the Tal'Darim. Declaring that Amon had lied to them, Alarak promises revenge against Amon, and joins force with Artanis. After Amon is destroyed, Alarak decides to find a new homeworld for the Tal'Darim rather than join the remaining Protoss on Aiur, though he allows any of his people who wish it one chance to remain with Artanis.

Alarak, in Legacy of the Void, possesses immense psionic powers and is always rude and arrogant, exhibiting a sadistic and totalitarian personality. He renounces the concept of freedom and holds zero respect for anything other than the ability to slaughter.

Alarak appears in Nova Covert Ops and is a playable character in Heroes of the Storm.

Ma'Lash was the Highlord of the Tal'Darim. He is featured in Legacy of the Void and in the short story Ascension. Ma'Lash used brute force to become the Highlord. He enjoys killing his challengers slowly, barely keeping them alive while at the verge of being extinguished. In Legacy of the Void, Alarak invokes the rite of Rak'Shir; Ma'Lash loses and dies.

Ji'nara is the current first ascendant of the Tal'darim. She was previously the fifth ascendant and is Highlord Alarak's direct subordinate.

Nyon is a Tal'Darim executor who Raynor's Raiders fight in Wings of Liberty for pieces of Xel'Naga artifacts. He is killed later in the game, when the Raiders destroy his mothership. He was not referred to by name until Alarak mentioned he was driven to insanity under the influence of terrazine.

Felanis was the leader of the Tal'darim who knew the truth behind the organization.

The purifiers are a synthetic race conceived as an "ultimate fighting force" at a time when Protoss scientists and engineers were making technological advancements in intelligent and sentient robotics.

In Legacy of the Void, Daelaam' forces uncover a Purifier robot whose personality and memories were cloned from Fenix. This Purifier thinks he is Fenix in a dragoon shell. Artanis is overjoyed to meet this manifestation of his old comrade and is in no rush to tell him the truth, allowing him to discover it at a pace he is comfortable with, by studying the combat logs. Eventually, upon learning more about Fenix, he decides to have his name changed to "Talandar." He becomes the ambassador between the Daelaam and the Purifiers, convincing them to join forces. He follows Artanis in battle to reclaim their homeworld.

Clolarion was a legendary Protoss executor, whose deeds were taught to Templar warriors long after his death. Because of his status, Clolarion was chosen to take part in the purifier program. His mind was scanned into a robotic shell, in an attempt to recreate and preserve the greatest warriors of the Templar. The Clolarion purifier was sealed in Cybros along with the rest of the purifiers after their rebellion against the Conclave.

In 2506, during the End War, the Daelaam under the command of Hierarch Artanis came to Cybros to reactivate the purifiers. Clolarion acted as their spokesman and leader during the mission, and ordered the Purifiers to engage the Zerg on the station, and then purified the surface of Endion, the forest moon Cybros orbited. With the battle over, Artanis asked the purifiers to join the Daelaam in the war against Amon. Clolarion questioned his sincerity and only accepted an alliance on the condition of Talandar being their ambassador.

The Zerg Swarm is the undisputed apex predators of zerg factions, an evolving swarm intelligence: a ruthless amalgamation of biologically advanced, parasitoid-arthropodal species, directed by an instinctive "adapt or die"-mentality. The volcanic world of Char serves as The Swarm's "primary hive cluster" in the Koprulu sector. Dedicated to the pursuit of "genetic perfection", the Zerg devour and assimilate advanced species across the galaxy, incorporating useful genetic code. They are a virus; they rapidly consume, mutate, adapt, and propagate in minutes. They thrive in the most inhospitable environments, creating superior strains in the process. They are named "The Swarm" per their hive-mindedness, seemingly endless force deployments, and relentless assaults they employ to overwhelm their foes: for The Swarm, sacrificing thousands to destroy or assimilate each one of their enemy's soldiers is a trivial matter.

The first broods were formed by the Overmind, with the direction of each brood being delegated to a cerebrate. A brood was engineered for a specific function, which impacted its numerical strength and the diversity of its strains. The Terrans gave the Great War broods reporting names based on beasts found in Earth mythology.[111] During the Brood War, the United Earth Directorate Expeditionary Fleet took control of the Zerg unaligned with Sarah Kerrigan by controlling the second Overmind. The enslaved broods played a critical role in ensuring the UED's temporary dominance of the sector.[112]

Feral Zerg are Zerg not under the control of any higher entity. These Zerg will simply devolve into predatory behavior: acting on the lowest intellectual level, consuming other animals for nourishment, attack everything around them. Control can be re-asserted over feral Zerg by a Broodmother or other command strains however.

The Overmind is the center of the Zerg Swarm's hive mind society, created by the Xel'Naga as a single consciousness for their experiments on the Zerg. It is the antagonist of StarCraft. At some point during its creation, it was secretly enslaved by the fallen Xel'Naga Amon, who implanted it with a directive to destroy the Protoss and bound the Zerg to a hive mind. The Overmind becomes aware of Xel'Naga, attacking and assimilating its masters.[113] Through this, the Overmind learns of the existence of the Protoss and is determined to assimilate the fellow Xel'Naga-empowered species, believing this will result in perfection.[91] To provide the necessary force to overcome the Protoss, the Overmind targets the psionic potential of the Terrans for assimilation.[114] He also assimilated Sarah Kerrigan so as to create a weapon to free the Zerg from the control of his Dark Master. The Zerg and Protoss clash on various Terran worlds, eventually leading to Zeratul assassinating the cerebrate Zasz. Zasz's death momentarily links the minds of the Overmind and Zeratul, allowing the Overmind to learn the location of the Protoss homeworld Aiur. The Overmind quickly launches an invasion of Aiur and manifests itself on the planet's surface. Following a lengthy and costly campaign on Aiur, Tassadar harnesses the energies of the dark templar to strike at the Overmind directly, disintegrating it.

A second Overmind is created in Brood War, formed from the merging of several cerebrates. This second Overmind never reaches full maturity, and thus lacks the power and intelligence of the original and is much weaker; attacks that were superficial to the first Overmind send the second into remission, although dark templar energies are still needed to kill it. The second Overmind is captured and drugged by the United Earth Directorate, who use its control of the Swarm to bolster its own forces in the Koprulu Sector, but it is ultimately slain by Zeratul.

Although no longer a major character in the story, the remains of the original Overmind appear again in StarCraft II. Following the interpretation of the prophetic fragments recovered by Zeratul on Ulaan by the Preservers of Zhakul, Zeratul deduces that the "Great Hungerer" referenced by the prophecy refers to the Zerg Overmind, and travels to Aiur to recover whatever memories lingered within the remains of the Overmind's husk.[115] In the course of his investigation, Zeratul encounters the spirit of Tassadar, who passes on vital information he obtained from the Overmind concerning the Queen of Blades, the Hybrid, and the Overmind's vision of one possible future brought about due to the death of Kerrigan. His remains was eventually used by Amon to build his ideal host body, alongside using countless captive Protoss, merging the remains to build the body. It took the whole force of the Protoss to eliminate the body.[116] Alongside Kerrigan, the Overmind was rated the eighth most diabolical video game villain by GamePro.[117]

The Overmind is served by Cerebrates as secondary agents in the Zerg Swarm, each of which commands an individual brood of Zerg that possesses a distinct tactical role within the hierarchy.[118] Alongside the Overmind, the cerebrates are the only Zerg with full sapience, each with its own personality and methods, although they are genetically incapable of disobeying the Overmind.[118] Cerebrates can be reincarnated by the Overmind upon death, though dark templar energies are capable of preventing this.[119] The death of a cerebrate causes the Overmind to lose control of its respective brood, which will then run amok.

Daggoth is highest ranking cerebrate who is in command of the Tiamat Brood, the largest and most powerful brood in the Zerg Swarm, and the most strong-willed and ferocious of the cerebrates.[91] It trains the player character, a young cerebrate, in the Zerg campaign of StarCraft and dispenses forces to protect Kerrigan following her transformation. Daggoth was charged with protecting the Overmind itself.[120] In the wake of the Overmind's death, Daggoth immediately takes command of the fractured Zerg broods and orders several cerebrates to merge to form a new Overmind,[121] but is opposed by Kerrigan. Daggoth perishes in the aftermath of the second Overmind's destruction.

While having no speaking lines in the Brood War expansion, Daggoth's unit portrait is used for almost all Zerg structures throughout the campaign.

The second most prominent cerebrate is Zasz, a clever but somewhat questioning leader[91] who commands the first strike Garm Brood. Kerrigan often argues with Zasz over her impulsive and seemingly rebellious actions; despite the Overmind's confidence that Kerrigan is loyal, Zasz remains suspicious. However, while Tassadar distracts the attention of Kerrigan's forces, Zasz is assassinated by Zeratul. Its death gives the Overmind and Zeratul a temporary mental link, allowing the Overmind to find Aiur and Zeratul to learn the origins of the Zerg.[122] Zasz's final words to Kerrigan proclaim her to be "the doom of us all"; following Kerrigan's rise to power at the culmination of Brood War, Zasz is seemingly proven correct.[123] Ironically, Zeratul's connection with the Overmind following Zasz's death reveals Kerrigan to be the only hope of resisting the eradication of all life by the Xel'naga Amon.

Various other cerebrates are also featured throughout the series, though following the death of the second Overmind, Metzen explained that all remaining extant cerebrates died, as they were not designed to live without their creator or killed by Kerrigan herself and absorbing their warriors to her side.[99] The pirate Alan Schezar used a khaydarin crystal to control a cerebrate and its brood.[124] Ulrezaj also used khaydarin crystals to achieve similar result.[125]

The Swarm was reunited under Kerrigan at the end of the Brood War.[126] The cerebrates were eliminated from the Swarm[127] but broods such as the Char Brood remained.[128]

Between the end of the Brood War and Kerrigan's defeat on Char, Kerrigan created numerous broodmothers, each of which would lead a brood. The queens were ordered to evolve and only submit to the will of the strongest leader, which became a problem upon Kerrigan's defeat. The brood mothers scattered their broods. Kerrigan was forced to follow and attempt to subdue them.[129] Following the eradication of the last cerebrates in Brood War, Kerrigan creates powerful and intelligent broodmothers to fulfill their role in the Swarm. Kerrigan commanded the broodmothers "to fight, to conquer, to be strong, and to lead by force of will." Through decentralizing command hierarchy, Kerrigan ensured that the Zerg Swarm could function without leadership. The strongest of these Zerg broods, The Zagara Brood, was led by Zagara. Following Kerrigan's defeat and de-infestation on Char, the Zagara brood remained there, seeking large egg piles in an acid marsh. Despite General Horace Warfield's extermination campaign against the Zerg remaining on the planet, the brood thrived while all others perished. Its prosperity was interrupted, however, when Kerrigan returned to Char and subjugated Zagara, thereby putting the brood under Kerrigan's control.

Zagara is a Zerg broodmother, Kerrigan's second-in-command, and the leader of the Zagara Brood. In the absence of the Queen of Blades, Zagara sought to reunite the Swarm under her own leadership. She rallied the feral Zerg of Char to her side and managed to hold out against the genocidal forces of General Horace Warfield. However, her brute tactics prevented her from achieving victory. When Kerrigan returned to Char, Zagara challenged her authority due to her regained humanity, thus deeming her unworthy to lead the Swarm. Once defeated by Kerrigan, the broodmother was forgiven, and she rejoined Kerrigan's Zerg Swarm forces. Her renewed loyalty is not left unrewarded though, as once Kerrigan ascends to become a Xel'naga, she relinquishes all command over the Zerg Swarm to Zagara, making her the new "Queen of Blades", but only after being evolved by Abathur and subjected to Kerrigan's teaching her some lessons. She is seen in the Epilogue, establishing a foothold over dozens of systems to grant a safe haven for the Zerg Swarm as it rebuilds from the long conflict against the Terrans, the Protoss, and Amon's Hybrids forces.

Zagara also appears as a playable character in Heroes of the Storm.

Niadra is a Zerg broodmother. She was created when Sarah Kerrigan placed a parasitic larva within the captured Protoss colonist Lasarra and allows her to be warped back to her people, and tasked her through imprinted memories with eliminating all the Protoss on board the ship. After being teleported on board a Protoss ship bound for Shakuras, Lasarra attempted to warn her compatriots but died as the parasitic larva spawned from her body. Shortly afterwards, it began infesting local fauna kept on board by the Protoss and hid within the ventilation shafts where it found a safe location to mature into a queen. After damaging the vessel's warp drive, Niadra and her brood became the only occupants of the craft, but they had traveled beyond the reach of Kerrigan's ability to communicate. With few other options, Niadra decided to continue the Queen of Blades' last directives: to survive, grow her brood, and destroy the Protoss.

Izsha is a Zerg advisor in service to Sarah Kerrigan. She is a unique type of Zerg. Izsha exemplifies a midpoint for Kerrigan, standing between Kerrigan's cold rationality and the feral nature of the Swarm. She harkens back to the ideology of the Overmind, but is still a rational individual. In earlier times, Kerrigan used her to store her thoughts and plans. On at least one occasion, she entrusted Izsha with a plan to infest a planet using the hyper-evolutionary virus through its water supply. Izsha reunited with Kerrigan following the latter's de-infestation and subsequent return to the Swarm. She served as an advisor, recalling memories from Kerrigan's time as the Queen of Blades and helping her to reclaim the Swarm while remaining attached to her queen's leviathan.

While Abathur was designed to be "evil," the concept of Izsha was to strike a balance between human and monster. Unlike Abathur, Izsha was to have a face that the player could talk and relate to, one that Kerrigan could have more of an emotional connection with.[130]

Abathur is a unique super intelligent Zerg-biologist creature, created from numerous Zerg species. He is the swarm Zerg's evolutionary master craftsman and archivist of the entire Swarm's DNA library. Arrogant and impatient, Abathur loves biodiversity, despises extinction, and instinctively wants to "consume" anything strange or different so that he can absorb, catalogue, and understand it, especially genetic code. Abathur is well mannered, holding true to his ideals of efficiency by often leaving out pronouns and connecting words in his speech. Abathur is constantly connecting DNA, experimenting on strains and studying the Swarm's enemies. Abathur perceives other beings in terms of their raw genetic material, not as sentient beings.

Abathur accepts that while the Overmind's instinctive desire for "true perfection" is impossible for the Zerg Swarm to achieve, he nevertheless finds it a goal worth pursuing in order to keep the Swarm ahead of the competition. Instead, Abathur believed that it is "purpose" that makes the Zerg strong. Abathur states that without an overriding will, "feral Zerg" are lesser than beasts, much like he was after the death of the Overmind. Abathur is personally responsible for the continuation of the Zerg species. He undertakes each experiment as though the survival of the species depends on it alone, and tolerates no genetic regression or evolutionary backstep. It is revealed in Heart of the Swarm that he was the one who designed the Queen of Blades.

In the novel Starcraft: Evolution, set years after the events of Legacy of the Void, Abathur was ordered to create a new breed of zerg called an adostra, which contained xel'naga essence. Overqueen Zagara had intended to use the adostra's vast powers to seed life of ravaged worlds and motion for peace with the Terrans and Protoss. Abathur secretly rejected such ideas, as he believed that war was necessary to continue the evolution of the Swarm. To disrupt Zagara's plans, he crafted Zerg creatures called "chitha" to cause strife between the races and spark a new conflict. However he was defeated, but kept alive and under closer watch by Zagara due to his importance within the Swarm. 

Abathur also appears as a playable character in Heroes of the Storm.

The primal Zerg are a Zerg subspecies from the Zerg homeworld, Zerus. They retain the physical and psychological traits of the Zerg prior to the creation of the Overmind. Often resembling reptiles or mammals more than their insectoid Swarm counterparts, the primal zerg are individualistic beings that fight and kill to absorb the genetic essence of their prey and advance their own evolution. Many primal zerg form packs and pursue a Darwinian 'survival-of-the-fittest' philosophy. Consequently, most primal zerg despise the Swarm, seeing them as corrupt for their submission to the hivemind. 

Dehaka is a primal Zerg pack leader from Zerus who is fixated on adaptation and collecting raw genetic material, which he refers to as "essence"; for Dehaka, "essence" is survival against extinction. Dehaka lost his large right arm prior to the Swarm's return to Zerus; it was later to be found in the same area where Sarah Kerrigan defeated the other primal pack leaders. When the Zerg Swarm returned to Zerus, Dehaka initially opted to simply observe the Swarm and Kerrigan. He witnessed the newcomers awaken Zurvan and the primal-infestation of Kerrigan. Dehaka perceived Kerrigan as the strongest of the Zerg pack leaders, and sides with her against his Primal Zerg brethren, believing Kerrigan would lead them to new "essence". Dehaka correctly predicted that the other Zerg pack leaders would refuse to submit and "adapt"; the other pack leaders were destroyed by Kerrigan, including Zurvan. Kerrigan confronted Dehaka afterwards, confirming that Dehaka had known that Zurvan would turn on her. Dehaka did not deny this, responding with "one Zerg would grow strong, the other would fall". Dehaka was last seen remaining with the Zerg Swarm.

Dehaka also appears as a playable character in Heroes of the Storm

Zurvan, the Ancient One, is a primal Zerg of Zerus who had lived for millions of years. Zurvan embodied the "survival of the fittest" ideals the primal Zerg pack leaders operated on. Zurvan was wary of the Overmind and the hive-minded Zerg swarm, believing that losing ones individuality to a single indomitable will is a terrible evolutionary fate for a strong Zerg. He was spawned before the Overmind, and lived to see the return of the Zerg Swarm to Zerus during the Second Great War. It shepherded a deinfested Sarah Kerrigan's rebirth into the Swarm, before challenging her and subsequently being killed and having its essence absorbed by her. Zurvan was younger than the power found in the first spawning pool but older than the first Overmind. It escaped being incorporated into the Swarm hive mind by Amon and remained on Zerus when the Swarm left the planet. In time, it became a pack leader and became immense both in power and physique. By the time the Swarm and a deinfested Sarah Kerrigan returned to Zerus, it had been millennia since Zurvan's last evolution.

Amon is the primary antagonist of the StarCraft II: Legacy of the Void expansion and ultimately the main villain of the franchise as a whole. He is described as a malevolent Xel'naga and is the mastermind behind the Protoss-Zerg hybrids. His ultimate goal is to remake creation in his image (the hybrids).

Amon is first alluded to in a discussion between Duran and Zeratul in the Brood War mission Dark Origin, in which he is described as "...a far greater power, a power that has slept for countless ages and is reflected in the creature within that cell."[131] In Wings of Liberty Zeratul's investigation into the Hybrids reveals that Amon's coming has been foretold; initially, he is described as "one who shall break the cycle of the gods." On Zhakul, Amon's role in the Ulan prophecy is further elaborated on, and it is here that he is first referred to as the "fallen one."[21] After arriving on Aiur to retrieve the surviving memories from the remains of the Overmind, Zeratul encounters the spirit of Tassadar;[22] from both beings Zeratul gains a glimpse into one possible future in which the Overmind foresaw Amon successfully employ his hybrids and the Zerg to annihilate the Protoss before turning on and wiping out the Zerg.[132] In this future, Amon taunted the Protoss by revealing Kerrigan to be the only one in a position to oppose him.[23][133]

In Heart of the Swarm Amon's identity and initial background are revealed. Amon came to Zerus after the other Xel'naga molded the Zerg. Desiring the Zerg's power to absorb the essence of their prey for his own goals, he connected many Zerg to a hivemind and later forced an overriding directive on the Overmind: the destruction of the Protoss.[22] Millennia before the start of the series, Amon died after a war with the other Xel'Naga who had discovered his work with the Zerg,[131] but work on the hybrids continued under the direction of the shape shifter Emil Narud. Sarah Kerrigan learned about Amon when she traveled to Zerus,[25] and came to realize his lingering influence over the Zerg swarm was a major reason behind her crimes as the Queen of Blades. Kerrigan later learned about Narud's attempts to restore Amon to life,[134] and attacked the shape-shifter's lab in order to stop him.[135] Although Kerrigan defeated Narud, the shape-shifter used his dying words to reveal that he had already accomplished his goal: Amon had returned.[136] Reflecting on her fight with Narud, Stukov speculated that the Xel'naga device used to de-infest Kerrigan may have actually had a hand in somehow reviving Amon. He noted that the original Queen of Blades had tremendous power, and that the device couldn't just simply erase it, surmising that it had to "go somewhere."[137][138] After exacting her revenge on Arcturus Mengsk, Kerrigan took the Zerg swarm to hunt down Amon to try to keep him from enslaving the Zerg again.

In the Whispers of Oblivion campaign released by Blizzard ahead of the upcoming Legacy of the Void, Amon is revealed to have been resurrected in the Sigma Quadrant's Atrias System. Since his resurrection he has been under the protection of the Tal'Darim, a fanatical Protoss branch devoted to Amon.[139][140]

In addition to the above-mentioned names, Amon is also referenced as "a malevolent presence within the void" by Zeratul in Wings of Liberty,[24] the "Dark Voice" in the game captions,[citation needed] and "the dark god" in the prequel Whispers of Oblivion campaign.[139] During his auditory taunts in the Wings of Liberty mission In Utter Darkness, a pair of glowing red eyes can be seen, but there is little else visually distinguishable about the character in the mission despite the fact that raw data exists for Amon in the map editor.[141]

Amon was the main villain in Legacy of the Void, though he did not appear in his true form until the epilogue campaign "Into the Void". He seizes control of the Khala, controlling most of the Protoss as they attempted to retake Aiur. Zeratul and other protoss who had their nerve cords cut were immune to that control. In his last act before being killed by the possessed Artanis, Zeratul severed the Hierarch's nerve cords, cutting him off from the Khala. Artanis rallies what few managed to avoid corruption and flees Aiur on the Spear of Adun, rallying an army to fight Amon's forces and destroy his power base, before returning to Aiur with the Keystone (the Xel'Naga artifact used to purge Kerrigan of her own corruption). Convincing the possessed Khalai to sever their cords and break away from the Khala, their action sends Amon's essence into the artifact, which then implodes, banishing his essence into the Void.

As the protoss celebrate their victory, however, Artanis and Jim Raynor are summoned by Kerrigan to Ulnar, the former Xel'Naga homeworld, which contains a gateway into the Void; Kerrigan seeks their help in going through and ending Amon once and for all. Fighting through Amon's minions, led by a reincarnated Duran/Narud, the trio release an imprisoned Xel'Naga named Ouros, who had appeared to both Zeratul and Artanis in the form of their deceased friend Tassadar to guide them towards his intended aim: For Kerrigan to ascend to become Xel'Naga herself, and use her powers to kill Amon, as only a Xel'Naga could defeat him for good. With the aid of Artanis and Raynor's armies, Kerrigan undergoes the ascension, and destroys Amon forever with a final blast of energy.

The xel'naga regularly conducted experiments on other species as part of their "natural life cycle". Two species, one with the "purity of form" and another with the "purity of essence", would merge naturally to create a new iteration of Xel'naga. This process had occurred numerous times. To this purpose, the last incarnation of the xel'naga uplifted the protoss and zerg, intending for them to lead to the culmination of another iteration of the cycle. Contrary to the xel'naga's intent, the hybrids were the result of a perversion of the process. Amon's servants created hybrids to aid his plan to dominate creation. Overt knowledge of the hybrids began spreading among the terrans, protoss, and zerg, after the Brood War, and most who knew understood the dire threat the hybrids posed to the status quo.

The shapeshifter is an enigmatic and mysterious character in the StarCraft Universe. Very little is known about this creature, beyond the fact that the shapeshifter was in fact a Xel'Naga, and by its own admission had adopted many aliases throughout its several millennia of existence. In each case that the shapeshifter appeared in a meaningful role, the creature has assumed the form of a Terran Male. The Shapeshifter's allegiance was to the fallen Xel'Naga Amon, and accordingly its actions were to further Amon's own goals.

After Blizzard confirmed Duran's return in Heart of the Swarm,[142] and tacitly implied that he may have appeared in Wings of Liberty,[143] many assumed that the character was reincarnated as Emil Narud. To support this position, fans point to the fact that Narud was revealed in Heart of the Swarm to be an ancient shapeshifter serving Amon (fitting his description of himself in Brood War as "a servant of a far greater power"), and moreover, "Narud" is "Duran" spelled backwards. Although this was observed and commented/discussed by fans in the series, Blizzard made no definitive effort to merge the two characters until the release of Whispers of Oblivion, a three part prequel campaign to Legacy of the Void. In Whispers of Oblivion, Zeratul confirmed that Samir Duran and Emil Narud were indeed the same individual.[139][144]

The shapeshifter makes its initial appearance as Samir Duran, an enigmatic ex-Confederate Ghost operative introduced in Brood War. Duran was highly intelligent and manipulative, as well as knowledgeable about both the Protoss and Zerg. A former lieutenant in Alpha Squadron, Duran formed a small commando unit after the fall of the Confederacy to fight Mengsk's Dominion.[146]

Duran quickly allied with the United Earth Directorate's expeditionary force,[147] and used UED resources to mount an assassination attempt on Mengsk and provided vital intelligence and strategic advice on the Dominion to DuGalle. Duran convinced DuGalle to destroy the psi disruptor, to Stukov's chagrin, and as the UED closed in on Mengsk and his allies, Duran sabotaged a key operation, allowing the emperor to escape. When Stukov reconstructed the psi disruptor, Duran killed him and revealed his allegiance was actually to Sarah Kerrigan.[148]

With Duran as her advisor, Kerrigan successfully established command over the entirety of the Zerg Swarm. However, Duran vanished shortly afterwards. In a secret mission, he was discovered by Zeratul engineering a Protoss/Zerg hybrid. Duran ominously explained that he "had many names throughout the millennia", that his work has little to do with Kerrigan, and that he served "a far greater power".[131]

Four years after the events of Brood War, the shapeshifter reemerged in the Korpulu Sector, now going by the persona Dr. Emil Narud – an enigmatic scientist first introduced in Wings of Liberty and later appearing in Heart of the Swarm. Narud was the head of the Moebius Foundation and was viewed as a genius on Zerg biology and an expert on Protoss and Xel'Naga technology.

In Wings of Liberty, Narud and the Moebius Foundation backed Tychus Findlay's contact with James Raynor as a way to get around an imperial decree from Arcturus Mengsk that made it illegal to traffic in alien goods.[149][150] Narud would later appear by proxy as the Moebius Foundation's representative during a mission briefing on Tyrador, wherein Narud lent James Raynor his medical transport ships to help Raynor destroy the foundation's data cores in order to prevent the Queen of Blades from gaining access to them.[151] On the eve of the invasion of Char, Raynor learned from Valerian that Narud had been working with the Dominion's Crown Prince for the entire duration of the game.[152] In the aftermath of the successful de-infestation of the Queen of Blades, a civil war erupts between Arcturus and Valerian; in an attempt to find a safe haven, Valerian and Raynor seek shelter with the Moebius Foundation. Initially, Narud greeted and temporarily sheltered the group, but after examining the Xel'Naga artifact and thoroughly questioning Raynor about Kerrigan, Narud revealed his allegiance to Arcturus and sold out the group to an incoming Dominion fleet, but the fleet's attempt to kill Kerrigan fails.[74]

Narud later reappeared in Heart of the Swarm after former UED Vice Admiral Alexei Stukov contacted Kerrigan with a message to seek out the Skygeirr Station research facility orbiting Ketill IV. Upon her arrival at the facility, Stukov explained to Kerrigan that Skygeirr housed the Dominion's primary Hybrid research and development laboratory, and that "Emil Narud" was actually an ancient shapeshifter in the employment of a fallen Xel'Naga named Amon. After the Zerg swarm breached the interior of the facility and began attacking the Hybrids within, Narud made his initial appearance, broadcasting a message throughout the facility to inform Kerrigan that she was not welcome in the station.[135] After the Swarm breached the lowest level, Narud personally moved to kill Kerrigan by driving a null zone towards the Queen of Blades.[153] When the null zone attack failed, Narud retreated inside a Xel'Naga temple dedicated to Amon. In a showdown with Kerrigan, Narud taunted the Queen of Blades by using his shapeshifting abilities – first morphing into Jim Raynor, and then into Kerrigan's own human form, in which he wounded Kerrigan with a psi blade similar to that wielded by the Protoss. Kerrigan gained the upper hand in the end, impaling Narud with her wing-spikes. With his dying breath, Narud proclaimed that Amon had been resurrected and that she would see him soon.[136]

During the epilogue campaign, the combined forces of Kerrigan, Raynor and Artanis ventured into the void in order to rescue "Tassadar" (really Ouros) and encountered Narud, who was Ouros's jailer. After a difficult battle Narud's forces were overpowered and Narud was cornered by not only Artanis Kerrigan and Raynor, but Alexei Stukov, who called him "Duran." He asked Duran if he remembered what he had done to him, and Narud assumed Stukov was simply there to gloat. Stukov said "No, I'm here to say good night you son of a bitch." (an echo of the words Duran had said right before shooting him). He then shot Narud with a psychic blast, finishing him for good.

Ouros was one of the Xel'Naga who helped construct the material universe and seed it with life to perpetuate the Infinite Cycle. At some point, he was captured by Amon while the rest of his race was extinguished. He was chained in the Void, which was twisted to the will of Amon. However, he could still subtly influence the material universe, leaving clues to help guide his creations to rescue him by using Tassadar's form (Zeratul and Artanis) and voices (Kerrigan).

The characters of StarCraft have been popular enough to inspire the creation of several collectable statues and toys. The first series of statues was released by ToyCom in 2003, consisting of a firebat[154] with markings similar to some original StarCraft concept art for the firebat,[155] a hydralisk,[156] and one of Tassadar[157] with a ceremonial sword, which is also seen in concept art for the original game.[158] A series of toys were also made available in 1998,[159] featuring two variations of the marine, another hydralisk, and a Protoss zealot. In addition, 1/30 scale model kits for the marine[160] and hydralisk[161] were released in 1999 by Academy Hobby Model Kits.

A second series of collectible statues, which included Infested Kerrigan,[162] Zeratul,[163] and a Terran ghost,[164] was in development but appears to have been cancelled. However, upon announcement of StarCraft II in 2007, Blizzard released a new collectible statue depicting Wings of Liberty mascot character Tychus Findlay.[165]

The characters and story of the StarCraft series have been received with praise and only minute criticism by many game reviewers. The GameSpot review of StarCraft described the voice acting as "great", stating that it brings the characters to life.[166] GameSpot goes further in the review for Brood War, commenting that the story and dialogue are with only a few exceptions "brilliantly written" and "one of the year's best stories in any gaming genre".[167] The reviewer of StarCraft for IGN praises the melding of the story into the gameplay and implies that the development of the characters during the course of the story, particularly that of Kerrigan, is unforgettable.[168] In addition, the review of Brood War puts the storyline as "solid".[169]

Gaming Revolution echoed this praise, saying the plot is "fantastic", but the reviewer added that he felt it was "over too quickly".[170] At GamePro.com, the reviewer cited that he felt "the characters were talking to me" and even expressed a development of an emotional attachment to the character of Raynor.[171] Electric Playground put the story as the best part of the game, if a little derivative, but described the voice acting as "really quite excellent".[172]The Chevrolet Volt is a plug-in hybrid and extended-range electric vehicle car that was manufactured by General Motors, and also marketed in rebadged variants as the Holden Volt in Australia and New Zealand and the Buick Velite 5 in China, and with a different fascia as the Vauxhall Ampera in the United Kingdom and as the Opel Ampera in the remainder of Europe. Volt production ended in February 2019.

Sales of the 2011 Volt began in the United States in mid-December 2010, followed by some European countries and other international markets in 2011. Global combined Volt/Ampera-family sales totaled about 177,000 units by the end of October 2018. The U.S. was the leading market, with 157,054 Volts delivered through the end of 2019, followed by Canada with 16,653 Volts sold through September 2018. Just over 10,000 Opel/Vauxhall Ampera cars had been sold in Europe as of June 2016[update]. Until December 2018, the Volt/Ampera family of vehicles was the world's bestselling plug-in hybrid vehicle. When it was discontinued, the Chevrolet Volt was still listed as the top-selling plug-in hybrid in the American market.

The Volt operates as a pure battery electric vehicle until its battery capacity drops to a predetermined threshold from full charge. From there, its internal combustion engine powers an electric generator to extend the vehicle's range as needed. While running on gasoline at high speeds the engine may be mechanically linked (by a clutch) to the car's gearbox, improving efficiency by 10% to 15%. The Volt's regenerative braking also contributes to the on-board electricity generation. Under the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) cycle, the 2013‍–‍15 model year Volt all-electric range is 38 mi (61 km), with a combined electric mode/gasoline-only rating of 62 mpg‑US (3.8 L/100 km; 74 mpg‑imp) equivalent (MPG equivalent).

The second-generation Volt's improved battery system and drivetrain increased the all-electric range to 53 miles (85 km), its EPA-rated fuel economy in charge-sustaining mode to 42 mpg‑US (5.6 L/100 km; 50 mpg‑imp), and the combined city/highway fuel economy in all-electric mode to 106 MPG-e, up from 98 MPG-e. Deliveries to retail customers in the U.S. and Canada began in October 2015 as a 2016 model year.

The Volt won several awards, including the 2009 Green Car Vision Award, 2011 Green Car of the Year, 2011 North American Car of the Year, 2011 World Green Car, 2011 SAE Best engineered car, 2012 European Car of the Year, and 2016 Green Car of the Year.

The production design model officially unveiled on September 16, 2008, as part of General Motors (GM) centennial celebration at the Wintergarden headquarters in Detroit.[1] The production model differed greatly in design from the original concept car. The carmaker cited necessary aerodynamic changes needed to reduce the concept car's high drag coefficient of Cd=0.43[2] down to Cd=0.28,[3] still higher than the Toyota Prius Cd=0.25. Another reason was the use of General Motors's new global compact vehicle platform Delta II to keep costs reasonable, and shared with the 2010 model year Chevrolet Cruze.[4] Another significant difference from the concept car was the seating, as the production Volt seats four rather than five passengers. This change was due to the higher-than-usual central tunnel that runs from the front console to the rear seat that houses the car's T-shaped battery pack.[5]

After the concept was put into the pipeline for production, GM began looking for a partner to develop the Volt's lithium-ion battery pack. The carmaker evaluated about 25 battery cell chemistries and constructions from around two dozen lithium-ion battery makers around the world.[6] Due to their more promising cell technologies, two companies were selected in June 2007, Compact Power (CPI), which uses a lithium manganese oxide (LiMn2O4) cell made by its parent company, LG Chemical; and Continental Automotive Systems, which uses lithium iron phosphate based cylindrical cells made by A123Systems.[6][7][8] By the end of October 2007 CPI (LG Chem) delivered their finished battery pack prototypes, and A123 delivered theirs by January 2008. GM's testing process was conducted at the laboratory the carmaker had created for the GM EV1 program. The battery packs included monitoring systems designed to keep the batteries cool and operating at optimum capacity despite a wide range of ambient temperatures.[6][8] To ensure the battery pack would last 10 years and 150,000 miles (240,000 km) expected for the battery warranty, the Volt team decided to use only half of the 16 kWh capacity to reduce the rate of capacity degradation, limiting the state of charge (SOC) up to 80% of capacity and never depleting the battery below 30%.[8][9] GM also expected the battery to withstand 5,000 full discharges without losing more than 10% of its charge capacity.[8] According to GM, as of August 2016[update], no batteries had been changed due to degradation.[10]

In April 2008 GM started extensive battery testing. In two years, the carmaker put the battery packs to the equivalent of 150,000 real-world miles (240,000 km) and 10 years of use.[8] The durability of the battery pack was tested for a broad range of extreme ambient conditions including a shaker table to simulate potholes and a thermal chamber, to simulate temperatures varying from 116 °F (47 °C), typical of the Southwest deserts, to −40 °F (−40 °C) typical of the Alaskan tundra.[6] In April 2008 the lithium-ion battery pack was placed in Chevrolet Malibus fitted with the Volt powertrain to be used as test mules for further real-world testing.[8][11] In October 2008, GM chose CPI (LG Chemical) to provide the battery systems for the first production version of the Volt.[12][13] In July 2008, GM confirmed that a non-turbocharged, 1.4 L 4-cylinder engine would be used as the range extender, and that the intention was to build it in Flint, Michigan.[14] In April 2009, General Motors let journalists test the Volt powertrain without the range-extending generator in the body of Chevrolet Cruze sedans that GM used as test mules at the GM Technical Center in Warren, Michigan.[15]

The first pre-production test car based on the final Volt design was built in June 2009, in Warren, Michigan,[16][17] and by October 2009, 80 Volts had been built and were tested under various conditions.[17][18] On March 31, 2010, the first factory-built Volt was produced at the Detroit Hamtramck Assembly Plant to test the production line and for quality control purposes, both of the tooling and the pre-production vehicles produced before regular production began.[19][20]

Tony Posawatz was the Volt Vehicle Line Director from 2006 to 2012,[21] and he was known as employee #1 and led the team from concept to production.[22]

General Motors held a ceremony at its Detroit Hamtramck Assembly Plant on November 30, 2010, to introduce the first Chevrolet Volt off the assembly line. The first Volt built for retail sale was earmarked for display at GM's Heritage Center museum in Sterling Heights, Michigan.[23] The second unit was offered at a public auction, with an opening bid of US$50,000 and it was won by Rick Hendrick who paid US$225,000. The proceeds went to fund mathematics and sciences education in Detroit through the Detroit Public Schools Foundation.[24] Deliveries to retail customers in the United States began in mid December 2010.[25] Volt deliveries began in Canada in September 2011.[26][27] The first deliveries of the Chevrolet Volt in Europe took place in November 2011.[28][29] The European version of the Volt, the Opel Ampera, was released to retail customers in Europe in February 2012.[30] Deliveries of the right-hand drive Vauxhall Ampera in the UK began in May 2012.[28] The Holden Volt was released in Australia in December 2012.[31]

The second generation Chevrolet Volt was unveiled at the January 2015 North American International Auto Show.[32] Retail deliveries began in the United States and Canada in October 2015 as a 2016 model year, with 1,324 units delivered in the U.S. that month.[33][34] Availability in the American market was limited to California and the other 10 states that follow California's zero emission vehicle regulations. GM scheduled the second generation as a 2017 model year to be released in the 39 remaining states by early 2016.[33] Manufacturing of the 2017 MY Volt began in February 2016, and the first units arrived at dealerships at the end of February 2016. The 2017 model complied with stricter Tier 3 emissions requirements and was available nationwide.[35]

The second generation Volt had an upgraded powertrain with a 1.5-liter engine that uses regular gasoline; the 18.4 kWh battery pack had new chemistry that stored 20% more electrical energy using fewer cells, 192 compared with 288 on the 2014 Volt. It had a new power controller that was integrated with the motor housing; the electric motors weighed 100 lb (45 kg) less and used smaller amounts of rare earth metals. GM engineers explained that the second generation Volt was developed with extensive input from Volt owners.[32][36][37]

The improvements allowed the 2016 Volt to deliver better EPA ratings than the first generation model. The all-electric range was rated at 53 mi (85 km), up from 38 mi (61 km) attained by the 2015 Volt. The gains in efficiency allowed the second generation to improve its combined fuel economy in gasoline-only (charge-sustaining) mode to 42 mpg‑US (5.6 L/100 km; 50 mpg‑imp), up from 37 mpg‑US (6.4 L/100 km; 44 mpg‑imp) for the previous model. The second generation rating for combined city/highway fuel economy in all-electric mode was 106 miles per gallon gasoline equivalent (MPGe; 2.2 Le/100 km), up from 98 MPGe (2.4 Le/100 km) for the 2015 first generation model.[38][39] The combined gasoline-electricity fuel economy rating of the 2016 model year Volt was 77 mpg‑US (3.1 L/100 km; 92 mpg‑imp) equivalent, 82 MPGe (2.9 Le/100 km) in city driving and 72 MPGe (3.3 Le/100 km) in highway.[40] Both the all-electric range and fuel economy ratings are the same for the 2017 model year Volt.[41]

The second-generation Volt seats five rather than four, as in the first generation.

In April 2013, CEO Daniel Akerson announced that GM expected the second generation Volt to be priced on the order of US$7,000 to US$10,000 lower than the 2013 model year with the same features.[42] The 2016 Volt pricing started at US$33,170 before any government incentives, plus US$825 for destination. The starting price was US$1,175 lower than the 2015 Volt.[43] In California, order books for the second generation Volt were opened on May 28, 2015.[44]

In July 2014, Opel announced that due to a slowdown in sales, they would discontinue the Ampera after the launch of the second generation Volt—and that between 2014 and 2018, Opel planned to introduce a successor electric vehicle in Europe.[45] General Motors announced in February 2016 that the all-electric Opel Ampera-e hatchback would go into production in 2017. This is the European version of the Chevrolet Bolt EV.[46][47]

In April 2015, General Motors confirmed that it would not build the second-generation Volt in right-hand-drive configuration. Only 246 units had been sold in Australia by mid-April 2015, and the Holden Volt was discontinued once the remaining stock was sold.[48]

The Volt received awards from multiple organizations:

U.S. organizations

International organizations

European organizations

Rest of the world organizationsWilliam Jason Reso (born November 30, 1973), better known by his ring name Christian Cage or Christian, is a Canadian professional wrestler and actor. He is signed to All Elite Wrestling (AEW), where he is the leader of The Patriarchy stable. He is a former two-time AEW TNT Champion and a one-time AEW World Trios Champion. He is widely known for his time with WWF/E. He is also recognized for his tenure in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA).

Reso made his debut in 1995. He wrestled in Canadian independent promotions early in his career, where he competed in singles and tag team competition with his best friend Edge. In 1998, he signed a developmental contract with the then-World Wrestling Federation (WWF, renamed to WWE in 2002) and made his debut the same year, immediately capturing his first championship in the company, the WWF Light Heavyweight Championship, in his debut match. Edge and Christian formed a tag team and gained notoriety for their participation in Tables, Ladders, and Chairs matches. They won the promotion's World Tag Team Championship on seven occasions. They are considered one of the major teams that revived tag team wrestling during the Attitude Era.[6] The team parted ways in 2001, after which, Christian held various singles titles in WWE, including the European, Hardcore, and Intercontinental Championships.

In 2005, Reso departed WWE and signed with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) under his Christian Cage ring name, after which, he won the NWA World Heavyweight Championship twice. He left TNA in late 2008 and re-signed with WWE in 2009, where he won the ECW Championship and the World Heavyweight Championship twice each until retiring in 2014 due to concussion issues. He was the 23rd Triple Crown Champion and 11th Grand Slam Champion in WWE history.

In March 2021, Cage made his debut for AEW, again reverting to his Christian Cage moniker, and officially resuming his in-ring wrestling career. Following this, he won the Impact World Championship on the first episode of AEW Rampage in 2021 (as AEW and Impact had a partnership at the time), and in 2023, he won his first title under the AEW banner in the AEW TNT Championship, which he has held twice. Additionally, he is a former one-time AEW World Trios Champion. In total, between WWE, AEW, and TNA, Cage has won 26 championships, including seven world championships and nine tag team titles and is regarded as one of the greatest professional wrestlers of all time. He has headlined multiple pay-per-view events between WWE, TNA and AEW, and was one of WWE's most prolific pay-per-view performers.[7]

William Jason "Jay" Reso was born in Kitchener, Ontario, on November 30, 1973, the son of Canadian mother Carol and American father Randy Reso.[8] He played ice hockey and was a wrestling fan as a child.[8] He lived in Huntsville and East Luther-Grand Valley[8] before moving to Orangeville, where he met Adam "Edge" Copeland, who became his best friend and tag team partner.[3][9] They attended Orangeville District Secondary School together, from which they both graduated.[3][9]

In September 1994, Reso enrolled in a wrestling school run by Ron Hutchison at Sully's Gym.[3] One of his early ring names was Christian Cage, a combination of the names of actors Christian Slater and Nicolas Cage.[3][9] Cage's wrestling career began in June 1995 in a match against Zakk Wyld, which resulted in a draw.[3] In 1997, he was a part of Thug Life, a stable that included Joe E. Legend, Zakk Wyld, Rhino Richards, and Copeland (under the name Sexton Hardcastle).[10] As a tag team on the Canadian independent circuit, Reso and Copeland were known as High Impact and later The Suicide Blondes.[11] The duo held titles in numerous promotions and competed in the United States and Japan.[12] Reso won the East Coast Wrestling Association (ECWA) Heavyweight Championship on July 18, 1998, which he held until October 15, 1999.[13] When Copeland received a tryout match with the World Wrestling Federation (WWF), Reso went with him and they faced off in a non-televised tryout match, which Copeland was booked to win.[12] After the tryout, once Copeland was promoted from his developmental status to touring with the WWF, he put in a good word for Reso and got him invited to Dory Funk Jr.'s WWF-affiliated Funking Conservatory training camp in 1998.[14] After completing his training at the conservatory, Reso signed a contract with the WWF to become a full-time performer.[12]

When Reso came to the WWF, he shortened his ring name to Christian.[3] Christian made his television debut as a heel at WWF's pay-per-view event Breakdown: In Your House on September 27, distracting Edge during his match against Owen Hart to reveal his allegiance to Gangrel.[15][16] Christian won the WWF Light Heavyweight Championship in his debut match against Taka Michinoku at Judgment Day: In Your House on October 18. He lost the title to Gillberg a month later.[3][17]

Christian was given the character of a vampire and formed an alliance with Gangrel and Edge, who (in storyline) was finally persuaded to join what became known as The Brood.[18] At Rock Bottom: In Your House on December 13, The Brood defeated The J.O.B. Squad in a six-man tag team match, then they briefly feuded with The Undertaker's Ministry of Darkness and later joining the team, but upon learning that Christian was beaten into telling Ken Shamrock the whereabouts of Stephanie McMahon, The Undertaker punished Christian by flogging him.[18] More loyal to The Brood than to The Ministry, Edge and Gangrel betrayed The Undertaker and rescued Christian from sacrifice.[citation needed]

In 1999, Christian and Edge parted ways with Gangrel, who associated himself with The Hardy Boyz (Jeff and Matt Hardy) to form The New Brood.[citation needed] As a result, they began feuding with The Hardy Boyz and competed in a ladder match for the managerial services of Terri Runnels and $100,000 at No Mercy on October 17, which The Hardy Boyz won.[19] At WrestleMania 2000 on April 2, Edge and Christian defeated The Hardy Boyz and The Dudley Boyz (Bubba Ray Dudley and D-Von Dudley) to win their first WWF Tag Team Championship in a triangle ladder match, which ultimately led to the creation of the Tables, Ladders and Chairs (TLC) match.[20][21] At Backlash on April 30, Edge and Christian defeated Road Dogg and X-Pac to retain titles. At Judgment Day on May 21, Christian, Edge and Kurt Angle lost a six-man tag team match to Rikishi and Too Cool, to whom they lost the titles soon after only to win them back in a four corners elimination match at King of the Ring on June 25. At Fully Loaded on July 23, Edge and Christian lost to The Acolytes Protection Agency (Bradshaw and Faarooq) by disqualification, but they retained the titles.[22]

Following their victory, Edge and Christian portrayed themselves as heels, shifting their in-ring personas from borderline goth to a comedic pair of "cool dudes". During this time, their trademark became the "five second pose", where they performed a pose in the ring for five seconds "for the benefit of those with flash photography" to mock, insult, or amuse the fans.[3][23] At SummerSlam on August 27, the Edge and Christian successfully defended the tag team titles in the first ever TLC match against The Hardy Boyz and The Dudley Boyz.[24] At Unforgiven on September 24, Edge and Christian lost the titles against The Hardy Boyz in a steel cage match and were not allowed another title shot. At No Mercy on October 22, Edge and Christian (disguised as Los Conquistadores) defeated The Hardys for the titles. The next night on Raw Is War, The Hardy Boyz dressed as the Los Conquistadores and defeated Edge in a handicap match after Christian was taken out backstage to regain the WWF Tag Team Championship. At Survivor Series on November 19, Edge and Christian teamed with Right to Censor's Bull Buchanan and The Goodfather in a four-on-four Survivor Series elimination match which they lost to The Dudleys and The Hardyz. At Armageddon on December 10, Edge and Christian regained the tag team titles in a fatal four-way match involving The Dudley Boyz, K-Kwik and Road Dogg and The Right to Censor, but they lost them eight days later to The Rock and The Undertaker only to win them back days later on SmackDown! thanks to special guest referee Kurt Angle. At the Royal Rumble on January 21, 2001, Edge and Christian lost the WWF Tag Team Championship to The Dudley Boyz.[25][26] At No Way Out on February 25, Edge and Christian were unsuccessful in regaining the tag team titles,[27] but they eventually recaptured them in the second ever TLC match at WrestleMania X-Seven on April 1.[28][29]

On the April 19 episode of SmackDown!, Edge and Christian were defeated by The Brothers of Destruction (Kane and The Undertaker) for the WWF Tag Team Championship.[30] At Backlash on April 29, Christian was part of the triple threat match for the WWF European Championship which was won by Matt Hardy. At Judgment Day on May 21, Edge and Christian competed in a tag team turmoil match which was won by Chris Benoit and Chris Jericho.[31] On the May 24 episode of SmackDown!, Edge and Christian competed in a fatal four-way tag team TLC match for the WWF Tag Team Championship in which Benoit and Jericho retained the tag team titles.[32]

After losing the tag team titles, friction arose within the team after Edge won the 2001 King of the Ring tournament on June 24.[33] It was also during this time that Edge was becoming a face during The Invasion storyline. Christian briefly turned face to help feud with The Alliance. Christian turned heel shortly afterward,[34] resulting in the two feuding for Edge's WWF Intercontinental Championship for several months.[35]

At Unforgiven on September 23, Christian defeated Edge to win his first Intercontinental Championship, but he lost it back to Edge in a ladder match at No Mercy on October 21.[citation needed] Christian won the WWF European Championship from Bradshaw on the November 1 episode of SmackDown!.[36] At Rebellion on November 3, Christian faced Edge in a steel cage match for the Intercontinental Championship, but he failed to win the title. At Survivor Series on November 18, Christian defeated Al Snow to retain the European Championship. Christian lost the European Championship to Diamond Dallas Page on the January 31 episode of SmackDown!.

After a series of defeats, Christian announced he would quit the WWF, but Page persuaded him to reconsider and adopted him as his protégé.[3] Christian betrayed Page and faced off against him for the European Championship at WrestleMania X8 on March 17, but he lost.[3] Christian began throwing tantrums in his gimmick at the time whenever things did not go his way and during the same event defeated Mighty Molly to win the WWF Hardcore Championship, but lost the title to Maven later that night.[37]

Christian formed an alliance with fellow Canadian wrestler Lance Storm on the June 20 episode of SmackDown!. On the June 27 episode of SmackDown!, Test, another Canadian, joined their team, now called The Un-Americans. Christian and Storm won the WWE Tag Team Championship at Vengeance on July 21 by defeating Edge and Hollywood Hulk Hogan. The trio then defected from SmackDown! to the Raw brand, appearing on the July 29 episode of Raw to attack The Undertaker. The Un-Americans teamed with Triple H, to defeat WWE Undisputed Champion The Rock, The Undertaker and Booker T and Goldust in an eight-man tag team match on the August 12 episode of Raw, after Test pinned The Undertaker. At SummerSlam on August 25, Christian and Storm retained the WWE Tag Team Championship against Booker T and Goldust, before interfering in Test's match with The Undertaker later in the night, only to be tossed out of the ring and for The Undertaker to defeat Test. On the August 26 episode of Raw, the Un-Americans attempted to burn the American flag, but were stopped by Booker T, Goldust and a returning Kane. On the September 2 episode of Raw, William Regal joined the team. Regal, an Englishman, was the only member of the team not of Canadian nationality. At Unforgiven on September 22, The Un-Americans lost to Bubba Ray Dudley, Kane and Booker T and Goldust. The Un-Americans lost the WWE Tag Team Championship the next night on Raw to the team of The Hurricane and Kane. On the September 30 episode of Raw, both Christian and Storm lost matches to Randy Orton, while Regal and Test lost to Rob Van Dam and Tommy Dreamer. This led to all four members attacking each other, thus disbanding the team.[citation needed]

Christian formed a tag team with Chris Jericho and competed in a fatal four-way tag team TLC match for the World Tag Team Championship on the October 7 special episode of Raw Roulette, involving Kane, Jeff Hardy and Rob Van Dam and Bubba Ray and Spike Dudley. Despite Kane's partner the Hurricane being absent from the match, he still retained the title.[citation needed] Christian and Jericho won the titles the next week on  the October 14 episode of Raw.[38][39] At Armageddon on December 15, Christian and Jericho lost the World Tag Team Championship to Booker T and Goldust in a fatal four-way elimination match also involving the teams of The Dudley Boyz and Lance Storm and William Regal.[40]

On January 19, 2003, Christian entered the Royal Rumble match at the Royal Rumble and was eliminated by Jericho.[citation needed] After a short absence, Christian returned on the April 7  episode of Raw, self-proclaiming himself as the new "People's Champion" and began calling his fans "The Peeps" after receiving advice and endorsement from The Rock.[41] On the May 5 episode of Raw, Christian faced Goldberg, but  the match ended in a no contest when 3-Minute Warning got involved which led to a rematch on the May 12 episode of Raw, where Christian lost to Goldberg in a steel cage match.[42][43] At Judgment Day on May 18, Christian went on to win a nine-man over-the-top-rope battle royal for his second Intercontinental Championship.[35] Christian lost the Intercontinental Championship to Booker T on the July 7 episode of Raw,[44] but he regained it after Booker T was legitimately injured at a house show on August 10.[45]

At Unforgiven on September 21, Christian defeated Chris Jericho and Rob Van Dam to retain the title in a triple threat match,[46] but later lost the title to Van Dam in a ladder match on the September 29 episode of Raw.[47] At Survivor Series on November 16, Christian was a part of Team Bischoff taking on Team Austin and during the match he eliminated Bubba Ray Dudley before he was eliminated by Shawn Michaels, though in the end Team Bischoff eventually won the match.[48] At Armageddon on December 14, Christian and Jericho defeated Lita and Trish Stratus in an intergender tag team match billed as the "Battle of the Sexes."[49]

At WrestleMania XX on March 14, 2004, Christian faced Jericho in a singles match with Stratus on Jericho's side, but Stratus accidentally struck Jericho, allowing Christian to defeat Jericho.[50] Stratus then joined forces with Christian, becoming his on-screen girlfriend in the process. As Christian feuded with Jericho, he introduced his own personal bodyguard, Tyson Tomko, which he dubbed his personal "problem solver". At Backlash on April 18, Christian and Stratus faced Jericho in an intergender handicap match which they lost.[51] During a steel cage match against Jericho on the May 10 episode of Raw which he lost, Christian suffered a severe back injury, causing him to miss almost four months of in-ring action.[9][52] Christian returned on the August 30 episode of Raw, attacking Jericho and thus resuming their feud.[53] The two had a ladder match for the vacant Intercontinental Championship at Unforgiven on September 12, which Christian lost, ending their feud.[54]

At Survivor Series on November 14, Christian failed to win the Intercontinental Championship from Shelton Benjamin. At New Year's Revolution on January 9, 2005, Christian and Tyson Tomko faced Eugene and William Regal for the World Tag Team Championship, but they failed to win the titles. At the Royal Rumble on January 30, Christian competed in the Royal Rumble match, but he was eliminated by eventual winner Batista.[citation needed]

Christian participated in the first-ever Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania 21 on April 3, but he failed to win as the match was won by Edge.[55] Following this, Christian, who had an encounter with SmackDown! wrestler John Cena, began commenting on Cena, claiming he was a better rapper than Cena and denouncing him as "poseur" while being noticeably cheered during these segments.[9] Soon after, then-WWE Champion Cena was drafted to the Raw brand on the June 6 episode of Raw, where Cena successfully defended the WWE Championship in a triple threat match against Christian and Chris Jericho at Vengeance on June 26.[56]

On the June 30 episode of SmackDown!, Christian was drafted to the SmackDown! brand in the 2005 WWE draft lottery and replaced Big Show (who was drafted to Raw) in a six-man elimination match for the newly created SmackDown! Championship, but he lost to John "Bradshaw" Layfield (JBL).[57] Soon after, Christian was given his own interview segment on SmackDown! called The Peep Show.[58] At The Great American Bash on July 24, Christian faced Booker T in a losing effort. At No Mercy on October 9, Christian competed in a fatal four-way match for the United States Championship which was won by Chris Benoit.[citation needed]

On October 31, his contract with WWE expired.[58] According to wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer, Reso was asked on the spot to sign a new contract, but he declined.[58] According to Reso, during his feud with John Cena he noticed that, despite his popularity, the WWE didn't see him as a main eventer and needed to prove himself.[59] His last match occurred during the tapings for the November 4 episode of SmackDown!, where he and JBL lost to Rey Mysterio and Matt Hardy.[58] Despite his quitting, Christian appeared on the October 31 episode of Raw and at Taboo Tuesday on November 1.[60][61]

Before leaving WWE, Reso filed to trademark the nickname of "Captain Charisma", which allowed him to use it as Christian Cage in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA), but after WWE disputed the trademark claim by citing a provision in the terms of his old contract he stopped officially using it on TNA programming by the summer of 2006, calling himself "The Instant Classic" from early 2007 onwards although he still continued to be referred to as "Captain Charisma" in off-screen appearances and sometimes wore his "Captain Charisma" entrance jumpsuits to the ring at live events.[62]

On November 13, 2005, Reso made his debut as a face in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) at TNA's pay-per-view event Genesis under his old ring name Christian Cage.[63] He announced his intentions to win the NWA World Heavyweight Championship held by Jeff Jarrett and rejected joining Scott D'Amore's faction, Team Canada.[63]

Cage would defeat Monty Brown at Turning Point on December 11 to become number one contender to the NWA World Heavyweight Championship.[64] At Final Resolution on January 15, 2006, Cage teamed with Sting to defeat the team of Monty Brown and Jeff Jarrett.[65] and defeated Jarrett for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship at Against All Odds on February 12.[66] Cage had his first title defence at Destination X on March 12, where he defeated Brown to retain the title.[67] On the March 25 and April 1 respective Impact! episodes, Abyss, his manager Father James Mitchell and Alex Shelley showed two pre-taped video packages that had been compiled in the weeks before the episodes, with first on March 25 depicting Mitchell stalking Cage's wife Denise, confronting her and even threatening that "they were coming".[68] The second aired on April 1, with Abyss, accompanied by Mitchell and Shelley, who was taping the segment with a camcorder like the previous video package, attacking Cage at his home in Tampa, Florida and nearly drowning Cage in his own pool.[69] This storyline led to Cage facing Abyss at Lockdown on April 23 in a six sides of steel cage match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship, with Cage winning and attempting after the match to attack Mitchell and gain revenge for all his recent evil deeds against Cage and his family, but Abyss stopped him, took a steel chain, wrapped it around Cage's neck and attempted to hang him with it until he passed out, after which Abyss and Mitchell stole the title belt and left the arena.[70] The storyline between Abyss and Mitchell and Cage continued until Sacrifice on May 14, where Cage defeated Abyss to retain the NWA World Heavyweight Championship under Full Metal Mayhem rules.[71]

At Slammiversary on June 18, Cage lost the NWA World Heavyweight Championship to Jeff Jarrett in a King of the Mountain match, which also involved Abyss, Ron Killings and Sting.[72] Larry Zbyszko and referee Earl Hebner intervened at the end of the match by helping Jarrett win.[72] The title was declared vacant until TNA's main authority figure at the time, Management Director Jim Cornette, awarded the title belt back to Jarrett on the June 29 episode of Impact! on the condition that he defend it against the winner of a four-way match involving Cage, Samoa Joe, Scott Steiner and Sting at Victory Road on July 16.[73] Jarrett agreed to the condition and Sting became the new number one contender at Victory Road.[74]

After Victory Road, Cage befriended the new number one contender Sting on the July 27 episode of Impact! by asking for forgiveness for doubting Sting's agenda by coming to TNA in January of that year.[75] Cage went on to say that he had asked Cornette the week before if he could be in Sting's corner in his match with Jarrett for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship at Hard Justice on August 13, but Cornette had told him he needed Sting's approval.[75] Sting accepted Cage's offer, with interviewer and occasional ring announcer Jeremy Borash announcing Sting's decision in a backstage segment on the August 3 episode of Impact!.[76] At Hard Justice, Cage was in Sting's corner at Hard Justice as he faced Jarrett (with Scott Steiner in his corner) and during the contest interfered to help Sting win numerous times—as did Steiner for Jarrett—until Cage turned on Sting by taking Jarrett's signature guitar and bashing it over his head—turning heel in the process.[77] Cage then allowed Jarrett to pin Sting and retain the NWA World Heavyweight Championship.[77]

After Hard Justice, Cage began a feud with Rhino as Rhino questioned Cage on his actions at Hard Justice on the August 17 episode of Impact!, but Cage replied saying he did it for the good of TNA.[78] Cage went on to explain later in the episode during a sit-down interview with TNA commentator Mike Tenay that he attacked Sting because he felt Sting did not show enough passion during the encounter to "get the job done" and win the NWA World Heavyweight Championship.[79] The following week on Impact!, Cage came down to the ring where he addressed his attack on Sting further until he was interrupted by Rhino, who attacked after a small debate, starting a brawl between the two which came to an end after Cage laid Rhino's head on a steel chair, picked up another chair and bashed it over the outside of Rhino's head performing a one-man con-chair-to in the process.[80] This led to a match against Rhino at No Surrender on September 24, which Cage won.[81] A rematch was held at Bound for Glory on October 22, which Cage also won under 8 Mile Street Fight rules.[82] They had their final bout on the November 16 episode of Impact!, where Cage defeated Rhino in a barbed wire six sides of steel cage match.[83]

Cage's old WWE enforcer Tyson Tomko (now going simply by Tomko) made his TNA debut on the November 23 episode of Impact! helping Cage in a match against Sting.[76] With Tomko at his side, Cage set his sights on the NWA World Heavyweight Championship now held by Abyss and at Turning Point on December 10 fought Abyss and Sting in a three-way match for the title, but he failed to win the match as Abyss won to retain the championship after pinning Sting.[84] Cage fought for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship once again at Final Resolution on January 14, 2007 against Abyss and Sting, this time in a three-way elimination match that he won by pinning Sting after Abyss was already eliminated to win the championship.[85] After Final Resolution, Cage prepared for his title defence against the new number one contender Kurt Angle, who had defeated Samoa Joe in a 30-minute Iron Man match at Final Resolution to gain the opportunity.[85] Heading into their encounter at Against All Odds on February 11, Cage announced on the January 17 episode of Impact! that he had hired a special consultant to assist him in training for his bout with Angle.[86] This consultant was revealed on the February 8 episode of Impact!, who turned out to be Scott Steiner after he attacked Angle following a match pitting the team of Angle and Joe against Cage and A.J. Styles.[87] Cage went on to retain the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against Angle at Against All Odds with Joe as the unofficial special outside enforcer.[88]

On the March 8 episode of Impact!, Cage proclaimed that he, Tomko and Scott Steiner were an "inseparable family", which he called Christian's Coalition.[89] After a short feud with Samoa Joe, culminating in a victory for Cage at Destination X on March 11 for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship,[90] Cage was announced as a captain of a five-man team for the Lethal Lockdown match at Lockdown against Team Angle during the March 15, 2007 episode of Impact!.[91] At Lockdown on April 15, Team Cage (Cage, Tomko, Steiner, A.J. Styles and Abyss) went on to lose to Team Angle (Angle, Joe, Rhino, Sting and Jeff Jarrett).[92] A stipulation was added that the wrestler who got the pinfall would become number one contender for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship and have their title shot at Sacrifice.[93] Sting was the individual who gained the pinfall victory for Team Angle and became the new number one contender.[92]

Abyss was later kicked out of the group after he attacked Cage on the April 19 episode of Impact!.[94] Steiner was the next to leave the group after he was attacked by Tomko following their NWA World Tag Team Championship match at Sacrifice.[95] Cage was set to defend the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against Sting at Sacrifice, but Angle was added to the match on the May 3, 2007 episode of Impact!, making it a three-way match.[96] At Sacrifice on May 13, the National Wrestling Alliance (NWA), the owners of the NWA World Heavyweight and the NWA World Tag Team Championships, stripped Cage and Team 3D of the titles.[97] NWA Executive Director Robert K. Trobich stated the reason was that Cage refused to defend the NWA world title at NWA live events.[97] Cage, still holding the physical NWA world title belt, defended what was billed as the World Heavyweight Championship against Sting and Angle, who was the victor of said contest by making Sting submit (who had "technically" just pinned Cage at the very same moment) and was announced as the new World Heavyweight Champion.[95] On the following episode of Impact!, Angle came to the ring with a new championship belt in-tow and announced he was the new TNA World Heavyweight Champion,[98] a championship that TNA had just introduced at Sacrifice.[99] Afterwards, Cage and Sting came to the ring and the three began to argue over who was the new TNA World Heavyweight Champion, but due to the controversial finish to their match at Sacrifice the title was declared vacant by Cornette and a tournament was held for the title which culminated in a King of the Mountain match at Slammiversary on June 17.[98] Cage won entry into the match on the June 14 episode of Impact! by defeating Abyss.[100] At Slammiversary, Cage failed to defeat the four other men (Styles, Joe, Angle and Chris Harris) and win the title as Angle hung the title belt to become the new and undisputed TNA World Heavyweight Champion.[101]

After defeating Harris at Victory Road on July 17[102] and him, Tomko and Styles losing to the team of Andrew Martin, Sting and Abyss at Hard Justice on August 12 in a Doomsday Chamber of Blood match to become number one contender to the TNA World Heavyweight Championship,[103] Cage restarted his feud with Samoa Joe and the two met at No Surrender on September 9, where he defeated Joe by disqualification when Joe refused to release his rear naked choke submission hold he had applied.[104] The two had a rematch with Matt Morgan as the special outside enforcer at Bound for Glory on October 14, where Cage lost to Joe and ended his 23-month-long undefeated streak by not officially being pinned nor made to submit.[105] Cage and Joe fought one more time on the October 18 episode of Impact!, with a spot in the 2007 Fight for the Right tournament to become number one contender to the TNA World Heavyweight Championship.[106] Cage defeated Joe to gain entry.[106] Cage made it all the way to the final round of the tournament, where he fought Kaz on the November 8 episode of Impact!, defeating Kaz due to interference from Styles and Tomko on Cage's behalf, but the match was declared a no contest, with the finals being determined in a ladder match at Genesis on November 11.[107] He lost the tournament final the second time around at Genesis.[108] Later in the night, Styles and Tomko helped Angle retain the TNA World Heavyweight Championship during the main event as Cage looked on from the ramp.[108] Styles and Tomko were later announced as members of Angle's new group, The Angle Alliance, which led to a title match between the two at Final Resolution on January 6, 2008 and also turning Cage face in the process.[109]

On the January 3 episode of Impact!, Tomko left both Christian's Coalition and The Angle Alliance.[110] Cage failed to win the title at Final Resolution as a result of Styles' betraying and attacking him during the bout, ending Christian's Coalition.[111] At Against All Odds on February 10, Cage got a rematch against Angle with Samoa Joe as the special outside enforcer, but he once again was defeated by Angle as this time Tomko interfered and cost Cage the match.[112] Cage teamed with Joe and Kevin Nash (known as The Unlikely Alliance) at Destination X on March 9 to defeat The Angle Alliance (Angle, Styles and Tomko) in a six-man tag team match.[113] On the March 13 episode of Impact!, Cage and Tomko were announced as opposing team captains for a Lethal Lockdown match at Lockdown.[114] At Lockdown on April 13, Team Cage (Cage, Rhino, Nash, Morgan and Sting) went on to defeat Team Tomko (Tomko, Styles, Brother Devon, Brother Ray and James Storm) at the event.[115] Afterwards, Cage and Rhino began competition as a regular tag team, with the pair being involved in The Deuce's Wild Tag Team Tournament for the vacant TNA World Tag Team Championship, but they failed to win the tournament and the championship at Sacrifice on May 11.[116] At Slammiversary on June 8, Cage and Rhino were involved as single competitors in a King of the Mountain match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship, but they failed to win the match.[117] Cage and Rhino went on to team with Styles (who had made amends with Cage and Rhino) in a losing effort against Angle, Brother Devon, and Brother Ray in a Full Metal Mayhem match at Victory Road on July 13.[118] At Hard Justice on August 10, Cage and Rhino defeated Team 3D in a New Jersey Street Fight.[119] Cage was involved in a three-way match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship against the champion Samoa Joe and Kurt Angle at No Surrender on September 13, but he failed to win the title.[120] Cage then went on to participate in another three-way match against Styles and Booker T at Bound for Glory IV on October 12, which Booker T won.[121] Cage was defeated in his final TNA match by Booker T for the newly established TNA Legends Championship at Turning Point on November 9, with the stipulation that if Cage lost, he would have to join the newly formed Main Event Mafia.[122] On the November 13 episode of Impact!, Cage had his final appearance in TNA before his contract expired as during the telecast he was to be inducted into The Main Event Mafia, but Cage was attacked and "injured" by Angle, Booker T, Nash and Scott Steiner after Angle learned that he would go back to WWE when his contract expired.[123]

In 2012, Reso made a one night return to TNA at Slammiversary 10 under his old ring name Christian Cage to announce the number one moment in TNA history as voted by the TNA fans (Sting's 2006 return in the aforementioned Final Resolution tag team main event). This was part of a deal which in return WWE were able to use Ric Flair in programming and induct him into the WWE Hall of Fame as a member of the Four Horsemen stable.[124]

In March 2006, Reso competed as Christian Cage three times in the United Kingdom for the One Pro Wrestling (1PW) promotion. His first appearance was on March 4 at their All or Nothing: Night 1 event, where he defeated Rhino.[125] His second appearance was at 1PW's Know Your Enemy: Night 1 event on May 26, defeating Steve Corino.[125] At Know Your Enemy: Night 2 event on May 27, 2006, Cage fought against the champion Abyss and Corino for the 1PW World Heavyweight Championship in a three-way dance, but failed to win as Corino gained the fall and the title.[125]

In May 2006, Reso made two appearances for the Ring of Honor (ROH) promotion as Christian Cage. His first appearance was on May 12 at ROH's How We Roll event in a tag match with Colt Cabana against Bryan Danielson and Christopher Daniels, which Cage and Cabana won.[126] His second appearance was a loss to Daniels at ROH's Generation Now event on July 29.[126]

On January 4, 2008, Cage, while still under contract with TNA, made a one-time appearance for New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW) at the Wrestle Kingdom II event, teaming with fellow TNA wrestlers A.J. Styles and Petey Williams to defeat RISE (Milano Collection A. T., Minoru and Prince Devitt).[127]

Reso returned to WWE on the February 10 episode of ECW under his old ring name Christian as a face, confronting then ECW Champion Jack Swagger.[128] Later that night, Christian defeated Swagger in his first match back.[128] On the February 24 episode of ECW, Christian faced Swagger again for the ECW Championship in a losing effort.[129] Christian won a tri-branded 15-man battle royal on the March 10 episode of ECW,[130] gaining entry into the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania 25 on April 5, which he failed to win.[131]

Christian won an elimination chase tournament to become the number one contender to the ECW Championship, gaining a title match at Backlash.[132] At Backlash on April 26, Christian defeated Swagger to win the ECW Championship.[133] At Judgment Day on May 17, Christian defeated Swagger in a rematch to retain the title.[134] At Extreme Rules on June 7, Christian lost the ECW Championship to Tommy Dreamer in a triple threat hardcore match also involving Swagger.[135]

On the June 15 episode of Raw, Christian faced Dreamer for the ECW Championship in a losing effort.[136] After unsuccessfully challenging for the ECW Championship in a Championship Scramble match that also included Swagger, Finlay and Mark Henry at The Bash on June 28,[137] Christian regained the ECW Championship from Dreamer at Night of Champions on July 26.[138]

On the August 4 episode of ECW, Christian retained the ECW Championship in an Extreme Rules match against Dreamer.[139] Christian then began a rivalry with William Regal over the ECW Championship, retaining the title against him at SummerSlam in eight seconds on August 23,[140] and at Breaking Point on September 13.[141] After a few months of defending the ECW Championship on ECW only, retaining the title against the likes of Zack Ryder and Yoshi Tatsu,[142][143] Christian was part of Team Kingston in a Survivor Series elimination match at Survivor Series on November 22, where he eliminated both Ted DiBiase and Cody Rhodes before being eliminated by Randy Orton. Team Kingston went on to win. At TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs on December 13, Christian successfully defended the ECW Championship against Shelton Benjamin in a ladder match.[144] In late December 2009, Christian became the longest reigning WWE-era ECW Champion.[145] At the Royal Rumble on January 31, 2010, Christian successfully defended the ECW Championship against Ezekiel Jackson.[146] On the February 16 episode of ECW, Christian lost the ECW Championship in an Extreme Rules match to Jackson on the show's final episode.[147] The ECW brand was deactivated shortly after.

On the February 22 episode of Raw, Christian was announced to have re-signed with the Raw brand, defeating Carlito later that same night to gain entry into the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania XXVI on March 28, which he failed to win.[148] Later, it was announced that he would be a Pro on NXT, mentoring NXT Rookie Heath Slater.[149]

Christian was drafted back to the SmackDown brand by the WWE draft.[150] On the May 7 episode of SmackDown, he was placed in an Intercontinental Championship tournament, defeating Cody Rhodes to get to the finals, where he lost to Kofi Kingston.[151][152] On the July 2 episode of SmackDown, it was announced that Christian would compete in the SmackDown Money in the Bank ladder match at Money in the Bank on July 18,[153] which he lost.[154] In September 2010, Christian tore his pectoral muscle and was expected to be sidelined for approximately six months.[155] Following surgery, WWE released a statement that revealed he was expected to only be sidelined for four months.[156] The injury was put into a storyline with Alberto Del Rio attacking Christian backstage on the September 24 episode of SmackDown.[157] Christian made his return from injury at Elimination Chamber on February 20, 2011, saving Edge from an attack by Del Rio.[158] On the March 4 episode of SmackDown, Christian saved Edge from another attack by Del Rio.[159] On the March 7 episode of Raw, Christian made his in-ring return from injury against Del Rio's bodyguard Brodus Clay, picking up the victory.[160] On the March 11 episode of SmackDown, Christian reunited with Edge and defeated Del Rio and Clay in a tag team match.[161] On the March 18 episode of SmackDown, Christian defeated Del Rio in a steel cage match, but was afterwards attacked by both Del Rio and Clay.[162] Christian was in the corner of Edge when he retained the World Heavyweight Championship against Del Rio at WrestleMania XXVII on April 3.[163]

On the April 8 episode of SmackDown, Christian lost to Del Rio in a number one contender's match for the World Heavyweight Championship after a distraction from Brodus Clay.[164] After Edge's sudden retirement from wrestling on the April 15 episode of SmackDown, Christian won a 20-man battle royal to face Del Rio for the vacant World Heavyweight Championship at Extreme Rules on May 1,[165] where Christian defeated Del Rio in a ladder match to win the World Heavyweight Championship for the first time.[166] On the May 6 episode of SmackDown, Christian lost the World Heavyweight Championship to Randy Orton ending his reign at 2 days (5 recognized by WWE due to tape delay).[167] At Over the Limit on May 22, Christian failed to regain the World Heavyweight Championship from Orton.[168] On the June 3 episode of SmackDown, Christian was the special referee for a World Heavyweight Championship defence by Orton against Sheamus, which Orton won only to be hit by Christian after the match with the title belt, turning heel in the process.[169] At Capitol Punishment on June 19, Christian faced Orton for the World Heavyweight Championship once again, but he failed to capture the title as the referee missed his foot under the bottom rope.[170] At Money in the Bank on July 17, Christian won the World Heavyweight Championship for the second and final time after Orton was disqualified for kicking him in the groin (the stipulation was if Orton was disqualified or the referee made a bad call, he would lose the title).[171] At SummerSlam on August 14, Christian lost the World Heavyweight Championship back to Orton in a No Holds Barred match.[172] On the August 26 episode of SmackDown, special guest General Manager Bret Hart announced that Christian would face Orton in a steel cage match on the August 30 episode of SmackDown for the title, which Christian lost to end their feud.[173]

Christian then began feuding with Sheamus, leading to two matches between the two at the Hell in a Cell on October 2 and Vengeance on October 23, both of which Christian lost.[174][175] On the November 4 episode of SmackDown, Big Show performed a chokeslam on Christian and Christian received a storyline neck injury, preventing him from competing that night and starting to wear a neck brace.[176] On November 9 during the WWE European Tour, Christian injured his ankle and was pulled from a traditional Survivor Series elimination tag team match at Survivor Series on November 20.[177] In December, Christian briefly appeared at the Slammy Awards and Tribute to the Troops.[178][179]

At Elimination Chamber on February 19, 2012, Christian returned from his injury to show support for John Laurinaitis.[180] Christian appeared on the March 16 episode of SmackDown, hosting an episode of The Peep Show and given a spot on Laurinaitis' team in a 12-man tag match at WrestleMania XXVIII on April 1.[181] On the March 26 episode of Raw SuperShow, Christian was injured once again after (kayfabe) re-aggravating his neck and shoulder in a match with CM Punk.[182] Despite the injury, Christian still appeared at the WWE Hall of Fame ceremony to induct long-time friend Edge.[183]

Christian made his return at Over the Limit on May 20, as a face, where he won a battle royal and defeated Cody Rhodes later in the show to win his fourth Intercontinental Championship.[184] At No Way Out on June 17, Christian retained the Intercontinental Championship against Rhodes in a rematch.[185] At Raw 1000 on July 23, Christian lost the Intercontinental Championship to The Miz ending his reign at 63 days and failed to regain it in a rematch the same week on SmackDown.[186]

After a ten-month absence, Christian returned from injury on the June 17, 2013 episode of Raw, defeating Wade Barrett.[187] At Money in the Bank on July 14, Christian competed in the WWE Championship Money in the Bank ladder match, but was unsuccessful as the match was won by Randy Orton.[188] On the July 29 episode of Raw, Christian defeated World Heavyweight Champion Alberto Del Rio in a non-title match.[189] That same week on SmackDown, Christian defeated Randy Orton and Rob Van Dam in a triple threat match to become number one contender to the World Heavyweight Championship, after which he was attacked by Del Rio during a post-match interview.[190] On the August 9 episode of SmackDown, Christian again defeated Del Rio in a non-title match.[191] At SummerSlam on August 18, Christian failed in his title challenge against Del Rio.[192] On the September 9 episode of Raw, The Shield dragged out an assaulted Christian as a message to anyone that disrespected Triple H following Edge's opinion on Triple H's recent abuse of power.[193] On that week's SmackDown, Edge promised Christian would return soon and get his payback.[194] Christian returned and appeared on the 2013 Slammy Awards, where he presented an award and appeared in a segment involving John Cena and Randy Orton.[195]

Christian returned on the January 31, 2014 episode of SmackDown to defeat Jack Swagger in a qualifying match for the Elimination Chamber match for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship.[196] On the February 17 episode of Raw, Christian attacked Daniel Bryan from behind and mocked Bryan during the match, turning heel.[197] At Elimination Chamber on February 23, Christian eliminated Sheamus before being eliminated by Daniel Bryan.[198] On the March 24 episode of Raw, Christian won a fatal four-way match including Alberto Del Rio, Dolph Ziggler and Sheamus to challenge Big E for the Intercontinental Championship, which did not come to fruition due to Christian suffering a concussion.[199][200]

After suffering his concussion, Christian appeared as a face on pre-show discussion panels for WWE for events including NXT TakeOver, Money in the Bank and Battleground.[201][202][203] He then went on to host The Peep Show program with Chris Jericho at Night of Champions in September,[204] and with Dean Ambrose on the November 7 episode of SmackDown.[205]

Edge and Christian were the guest hosts for the December 29 episode of Raw, where WWE commentator Jerry Lawler referred to Christian as "retired".[206] Pro Wrestling Insider corroborated Lawler's statement, adding that because of multiple concussions and other injuries, the company considered Christian retired as an active wrestler.[207] On the March 2, 2016 episode of Talk Is Jericho, Christian said that while he has had no formal discussion with management regarding his retirement, he would be unlikely to wrestle again.[208] He confirmed his status on the September 22, 2017 edition of E&C's Pod of Awesomeness, saying: "I had to retire, like, right around 40... 'cause of the concussion stuff".[209]

Starting on February 21, 2016, Reso began appearing along with Edge in the WWE Network exclusive The Edge and Christian Show That Totally Reeks of Awesomeness, but in July 2017 it was announced that the show was cancelled from the Network.[210] In mid-May 2016, it became known that Reso had been released from his talent contract.[211] On the June 22, Talk Is Jericho podcast focusing on the Chris Benoit tragedy, Jericho mentioned Christian as an example of modern wrestlers who had to retire as the WWE would no longer give them medical clearances due to concussion related injuries (this was largely as a consequence of the Benoit incident as well as better knowledge of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) and other concussion related risks).[212]

At the Raw 25 Years event on January 22, 2018, Christian hosted The Peep Show with special guests Jason Jordan and Seth Rollins, but it was later interrupted by The Bar (Cesaro and Sheamus).[213] On April 7, Christian appeared with Edge to induct the Dudley Boyz into the WWE Hall of Fame.[214] In October 2019, Christian started appearing as a regular contributor on WWE Backstage.[215]

On the June 8, 2020 episode of Raw, Christian hosted The Peep Show with special guest Edge, who had returned to competition in January and was feuding with Randy Orton.[216] The following week on Raw, Christian was challenged to an unsanctioned match by Orton.[217] Christian, who had no offense in the match, quickly lost after a low blow from Ric Flair, which was followed by a punt kick from Orton.[218] At Clash of Champions, Christian got revenge on Orton by attacking him during his ambulance match against Drew McIntyre for the WWE Championship.[219] He then appeared as a surprise entrant in the 2021 Royal Rumble match, entering at number 24 and lasting over 18 minutes before being eliminated by Seth Rollins.[220] During the match, he briefly reunited with Edge, who would eventually win by last eliminating Orton.[221] Following this, it was reported that Reso was no longer under contract with WWE.[222]

Reso made his surprise debut for All Elite Wrestling (AEW) as Christian Cage and signed a multi-year contract at Revolution on March 7, 2021.[223][224] At Double or Nothing on May 30, Cage participated in the Casino Battle Royale, but he was the last competitor eliminated by the eventual winner Jungle Boy.[225] Soon after, he would begin a partnership with Jungle Boy and become his mentor.[226] Cage faced Kenny Omega, defeating him for the Impact World Championship on the premiere episode of Rampage on August 13,[227] but losing at All Out in a match for the AEW World Championship, marking Cage's first loss in AEW.[228] At the Revolution event on March 6, 2022, Cage competed in the Face of the Revolution ladder match for a future opportunity at the AEW TNT Championship, but the match was won by Wardlow.[229]

On the June 15 special episode of Dynamite titled Road Rager, Cage attacked Jungle Boy after he and Luchasaurus lost the AEW World Tag Team Championship to The Young Bucks in a ladder match, turning heel for the first time in AEW.[230] Cage would initiate a rivalry with Jungle Boy, mocking him for the death of his father, famed actor Luke Perry.[231] Cage and Jungle Boy would face in a match at the All Out event on September 4, where Cage defeated Jungle Boy in 20 seconds after Luchasaurus attacked him and allied himself with Cage.[232] Following this, it was revealed that Cage had suffered a triceps injury, which would render him unable to compete for the next six to nine months.[233] Cage returned from his injury on the February 15, 2023 episode of Dynamite, attacking Jungle Boy.[234] At Revolution, he was defeated by Jungle Boy in a Final Burial match, ending their rivalry.[235]



"Christian is phenomenal right now. He is literally doing some of the best work of his career, and he is currently one of the most entertaining things on either Collision OR Dynamite... A lot of younger heels really need to take the time to study what Christian is doing and replicate it in their own ways."

At Double or Nothing on May 28, Cage lost to Wardlow in a ladder match for the AEW TNT Championship.[237] Wardlow then lost the title to Luchasaurus, with Cage's help, on the premiere episode of Collision, on June 17.[238] Cage then started a new storyline where he claimed to be the AEW TNT Champion and would carry the championship around with him, despite the actual champion being Luchasaurus. Cage's new character would receive acclaim from critics, audiences and other wrestlers; fellow AEW wrestler MJF opined that Cage was the "best he's been in his entire career".[239][240][236] Cage and Luchasaurus would begin a feud with Darby Allin over the championship.[241] On the August 23 edition of Dynamite, Cage was added to the tag team coffin match at All In, following AR Fox's removal from the Mogul Embassy, replacing Fox and teaming with Swerve Strickland to face Allin and Sting.[242] On August 27 at All In, Cage and Strickland were defeated by Allin and Sting, who threw Strickland in the coffin to win the match.[243] The following week at All Out on September 3, Cage helped Luchasaurus defeat Allin to retain the AEW TNT Championship.[244] On the September 23 episode of Collision, Cage pinned Luchasaurus in a triple threat match (also involving Allin) to become the new AEW TNT Champion.[245]

At WrestleDream on October 1, Cage defeated Allin in a two out of three falls match to retain the AEW TNT Championship. After the match, Cage, Luchasaurus, and Nick Wayne (who turned on Allin) assaulted Allin and Sting; they were interrupted by the debuting Adam Copeland, known as Edge in WWE, who ran out to confront Cage and save Allin.[246] Cage's faction was later called The Patriarchy, with Cage being recognized as "The Patriarch" of the faction.[247][248] At Full Gear on November 18, The Patriarchy lost to Copeland, Sting and Allin in a six-man tag team match.[249] On the following episode of Dynamite, Cage renamed Luchasaurus as Killswitch (after his finishing move) and Wayne as "The Prodigy" Nick Wayne.[250] On the December 6 episode of Dynamite, Cage successfully defended the AEW TNT Championship against Copeland, after Shayna Wayne (Wayne's mother) hit Copeland with the title belt in retaliation for taking out Nick. On the December 23 episode of Collision, Cage accepted Copeland's challenge to a no disqualification match for the AEW TNT Championship at Worlds End on December 30, while announcing that Shayna Wayne had joined The Patriarchy as "The Matriarch" Mother Wayne.[251][252] At Worlds End, Cage lost the title to Copeland, ending his reign at 98 days. Immediately after the match, Cage demanded and invoked Killswitch's AEW TNT Championship title shot (which Killswitch had won earlier that night) and defeated Copeland to win the AEW TNT Championship for the second time.[253] On the March 20, 2024 episode of Dynamite, Cage lost the AEW TNT Championship to Copeland in an I Quit match, ending his second reign at 81 days and ending their six-month feud.[254]

On the May 1 episode of Dynamite, Cage returned from an almost two-month hiatus as the challenger for Swerve Strickland's AEW World Championship at Double or Nothing on May 26, where he failed to win the title from Strickland.[255][256] On the June 15 episode of Collision, Cage declared that he would challenge for the AEW World Championship again but would first challenge for the AEW World Trios Championship with Killswitch and Wayne.[257] On the July 21 episode of Collision, The Patriarchy defeated the Bang Bang Gang (Juice Robinson and The Gunns) for the vacant AEW World Trios Championship, after interference from Mother Wayne. This is Cage's first six-man tag team championship win of his career.[258] On August 25 at All In, The Patriarchy lost the AEW World Trios Championship in a four-way London ladder match to Pac and Blackpool Combat Club (Claudio Castagnoli and Wheeler Yuta), ending their reign at 37 days. Later in the show, Cage won a Casino Gauntlet match to earn the right to challenge for the AEW World Championship whenever he wants.[259] Two weeks later at All Out on September 7, Cage attempted to cash-in his AEW World Championship match contract on Bryan Danielson after Danielson successfully defended his title against Jack Perry but was blocked by the Blackpool Combat Club.[260] On November 23 at Full Gear, Cage attempted to cash-in on champion Jon Moxley but would be blocked again, this time by Jay White.[261] At Revolution on March 9, 2025, Cage cashed in his contract in the main event between Moxley and Cope making it a three-way match but failed to win the title when he was choked out by Moxley.[262]

On August 13, 2021 on the premiere episode of Rampage, Cage defeated Kenny Omega to win the Impact World Championship. On the August 19, 2021 episode of Impact!, as the new Impact World Champion, he made his first Impact appearance since 2012. The announcers recognized his previous two NWA World Heavyweight Championship reigns, though this recent reign was his first under the Impact World Championship lineage. Upon his return, he retired the TNA World Heavyweight Championship and considered the Impact World Championship the sole world title belt in the promotion.[263] He was then confronted by Brian Myers, his challenger at Emergence, a match which Cage won.[264] He then retained his title against Ace Austin at Victory Road.[265][266] On the October 7 episode of Impact!, Cage and Josh Alexander defeated Ace Austin and Madman Fulton. At Bound for Glory on October 23, Cage lost the title to Josh Alexander.[267][268]

Like many prominent wrestlers with lengthy careers, Christian's character has evolved considerably over the years. When he debuted on the national stage, he was a scowling goth figure who never spoke. Ironically, he later became known for both his interview skills and, when a babyface, his humorous, fun-loving, surfer-type persona. As a villain, Christian is typically self-absorbed, vindictive and occasionally sadistic while still retaining quick wit.

Christian began to build up a loyal fanbase around the spring of 2005, despite his placement as a villain; he referred to them as his "Peeps",[269] "Peepulation" (a play on the word "population"),[270] or the "Christian Coalition".[271] He also hosted a talk show segment called The Peep Show which sometimes gets co-hosted by Edge called The Cutting Edge Peep Show.

As a finisher, Christian uses an inverted double underhook facebuster, called the Killswitch.[2] He also utilized a spear as tribute to his best friend Edge, as well as a frog splash in memory of Eddie Guerrero.[5]

While on tour with WWE in England, Reso met German model Denise Hartmann; they were married on May 25, 2001.[272] In December 2013, Reso announced the birth of his daughter during the time he had taken off due to recurring post-concussive symptoms.[272] On May 2, 2019, Hartmann filed for divorce from Reso.[273] The divorce was finalized in January 2020.[273]

In 2007, TNA Home Video released a DVD titled The Instant Classic: Christian Cage, covering his beginnings in the independent circuit and other various subjects up to his second NWA World Heavyweight Championship reign.[274] Reso is also the host of the DVD The Ladder Match 2: Crash and Burn. In September 2015, Edge and Christian were guests on the Stone Cold Steve Austin Podcast, which aired on the WWE Network. Edge and Christian were also the hosts and stars of a WWE Network sketch comedy series titled The Edge and Christian Show That Totally Reeks of Awesomeness, which had two seasons, the first of which aired from February to May 2016 with the second from November 2018 to February 2019.

Christian has been a playable character in several professional wrestling video games. Most notably in a number of WWE's video games, including WWF Attitude (1999), WWF WrestleMania 2000 (1999), WWF SmackDown! (2000), WWF No Mercy (2000), WWF SmackDown! 2: Know Your Role (2000), WWF/E With Authority! (2001), WWF Road to WrestleMania (2001), WWF SmackDown! Just Bring It (2001), WWF/E Raw (2002),  WWE WrestleMania X8 (2002), WWE Road to WrestleMania X8 (2002), WWE SmackDown! Shut Your Mouth (2002), WWE Crush Hour (2003), WWE WrestleMania XIX (2003), WWE Raw 2 (2003), WWE SmackDown! Here Comes the Pain (2003), WWE Day of Reckoning (2004), WWE Survivor Series (2004), WWE SmackDown! vs. Raw (2004), WWE Day of Reckoning 2 (2005), WWE SmackDown! vs. Raw 2006 (2005), WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2010 (2009), WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2011 (2010), WWE '12 (2011), WWE WrestleFest (2012), WWE '13 (2012), WWE 2K14 (2013), WWE SuperCard (2014), WWE 2K15 (2014), WWE 2K17 (2016), WWE Champions (2017), WWE 2K18 (2017), WWE 2K19 (2018), WWE 2K20 (2019), and WWE 2K Battlegrounds (2020). He was also playable in TNA's TNA Impact! (2008) and AEW's AEW Fight Forever (2023).

In March 2017, Reso has hosted a podcast with Copeland called E&C's Pod of Awesomeness with the show ending in late 2019.[275]The Churches of Christ, also commonly known as the Church of Christ, is a loose association of autonomous Christian congregations located around the world. Typically, their distinguishing beliefs are that of the necessity of baptism for salvation and the prohibition of musical instruments in worship. Many such congregations identify themselves as being nondenominational.[12] The Churches of Christ arose in the United States from the Restoration Movement of 19th-century Christians who declared independence from denominations and traditional creeds. They sought "the unification of all Christians in a single body patterned after the original church described in  the New Testament."[13]: 54 

Modern Churches of Christ have their historical roots in the Restoration Movement, which was a convergence of Christians across denominational lines in search of a return to an original "pre-denominational" form of Christianity.[14][15]: 108  Participants in this movement sought to base their doctrine and practice on the Bible alone, rather than recognizing the traditional councils and denominational hierarchies that had come to define Christianity since the first century A.D.[14][15]: 82, 104, 105   Members of the Churches of Christ believe that Jesus founded only one church, that the current divisions among Christians do not express God's will, and that the only basis for restoring Christian unity is the Bible.[14]  They simply identify themselves as "Christians", without using any other forms of religious or denominational identification.[16][17][18]: 213   They aspire to be the New Testament church as established by Christ.[19][20][21]: 106 

Members of the church of Christ do not conceive of themselves as a new church started near the beginning of the 19th century. Rather, the whole movement is designed to reproduce in contemporary times the church originally established on Pentecost, A.D. 33. The strength of the appeal lies in the restoration of Christ's original church.
Churches of Christ generally share the following theological beliefs and practices:[14]

In keeping with their history, the Churches of Christ claim the New Testament as their sole rule of faith and practice in deciding matters of doctrine and ecclesiastical structure.[26] They view the Old Testament as divinely inspired[21]: 103  and historically accurate, but they do not consider its laws to be binding under the New Covenant in Christ (unless they are repeated in the New Testament) (Hebrews 8: 7–13).[27]: 388 [28]: 23–37 [29]: 65–67  They believe that the New Testament demonstrates how a person may become a Christian (and thus a part of the universal Church of Christ) and how a church should be collectively organized and carry out its scriptural purposes.[14]



In 2022, the total membership of Churches of Christ is estimated to be between 1,700,000 and 2,000,000,[30][31] with over 40,000 individual congregations worldwide.[31] In the United States, there are approximately 1,087,559 members and 11,776 congregations.[31] Overall U.S. membership was approximately 1.3 million in 1990 and 1.3 million in 2008.[32]: 5  Estimates of the proportion of the US adult population associated with the Churches of Christ vary from 0.8% to 1.5%.[32]: 5 [33]: 12, 16  Approximately 1,240 congregations, with 172,000 members, are predominantly African-American; 240 congregations with 10,000 members are Spanish-speaking.[34]: 213  The average congregation size is approximately 100 members, with larger congregations reporting over 1,000 members.[34]: 213  In 2000, the Churches of Christ were the 12th largest religious group in the U.S. based on the number of members, but the 4th largest in number of congregations.[35]

Within the U.S., membership in the Churches of Christ has declined by approximately 12% over the period from 1980 through 2007. The current retention rate of young adults graduating from high school appears to be approximately 60%. Membership is concentrated, with 70% of the U.S. membership, in thirteen states. Churches of Christ had a presence in 2,429 counties, placing them fifth behind the United Methodist Church, Catholic Church, Southern Baptist Convention and Assemblies of God – but the average number of adherents per county was approximately 677. The divorce rate was 6.9%, much lower than national averages.[35]

"Church of Christ" is the most common name used by this group. In keeping with their focus of not being a denomination, using Ephesians 1:22–23 as reference to the church being the body of Christ and a body cannot be divided, congregations have identified themselves primarily as community churches and secondarily as Churches of Christ.[34]: 219–220  A much earlier tradition is to identify a congregation as "the church" at a particular location, with no other description or qualifiers.[34]: 220 [36]: 136–137  A primary motivation behind the name is the desire to use a scriptural or Biblical name – to identify the church using a name that is found in the New Testament.[13][24]: 163, 164 [36][37]: 7–8   Adherents are also referred to as Campbellites by academics[18] and other denominations[38] because it is assumed that they are followers of the teachings of Alexander Campbell, similar to Lutherans or Calvinists.  Campbell himself refuted the idea that a denomination was started by him or that he was the head of one in The Christian Baptist publication in 1826 and 1828, stating: "Some religious editors in Kentucky call those who are desirous of seeing the ancient order of things restored, 'the Restorationers', 'the Campbellites'... This may go well with some; but all who fear God and keep his commands will pity and deplore the weakness and folly of those who either think to convince or to persuade by such means" (The Christian Baptist, Vol. IV, 88–89) and: "It is a nickname of reproach invented and adopted by those whose views, feelings and desires are all sectarian – who cannot conceive of Christianity in any other light than an ISM" (The Christian Baptist, Vol. V, 270). He was also associated with the Baptist denomination until 1820. The term "Campbellite" is usually offensive to members of the churches of Christ because members claim no allegiance to anyone except Jesus Christ and teach only what is presented in biblical texts.[39]

Alexander Campbell said the "calling of Bible things by Bible names" was important in the reformation.[40] This became an early slogan of the Restorationist Movement.[41]: 688   These congregations generally avoid names that associate the church with a particular man (other than Christ) or a particular doctrine or theological point of view (e.g., Lutheran, Wesleyan, Reformed).[13][17]  They believe that Christ established only one church, and that the use of denominational names serves to foster division among Christians.[24]: 23, 24 [36][42][43][44][45] Thomas Campbell expressed an ideal of unity in his Declaration and Address: "The church of Jesus Christ on earth is essentially, intentionally, and constitutionally one."[41]: 688   This statement essentially echoes the words of Jesus Christ in John 17:21, 23.

Other terms are derived from their use in the New Testament: "church of God", "church of the Lord", "churches of Christ", "church of the first-born", "church of the living God", "the house of God", and "the people of God",[36][46] while terms recognized as scriptural, such as Church of God, are avoided to prevent confusion or identification with other groups that use those designations.[13][36][47]  As a practical matter, use of a common term is seen as a way to help individual Christians find congregations with a similar approach to the scriptures.[36][48] Members understand that a scriptural name can be used in a "denominational" or "sectarian" way.[13]: 31 [36]: 83–94, 134–136 [46] Using the term "Church of Christ" exclusively has been criticized as identifying a denomination.[13]: 31 [36]: 83–94, 134–136 [46] Many congregations and individuals do not capitalize the word "church" in the phrases "church of Christ" and "churches of Christ".[49]: 382 [50]  This is based on the understanding that the term "church of Christ" is used in the New Testament as a descriptive phrase, indicating that the church belongs to Christ, rather than as a proper name.[36]: 91 

Church government is congregational rather than denominational. Churches of Christ purposefully have no central headquarters, councils, or other organizational structure above the local church level.[18]: 214 [21]: 103 [22]: 238 [23]: 124 [51]  Rather, the independent congregations are a network with each congregation participating at its own discretion in various means of service and fellowship with other congregations (see Sponsoring church (Churches of Christ)).[14][23]: 124 [52][53]  Churches of Christ are linked by their shared commitment to Biblical restoration principles.[14][21]: 106  Congregations which do not participate with other church congregations and which refuse to pool resources in order to support outside causes (such as mission work, orphanages, Bible colleges, etc.) are sometimes called "non-institutional".

Congregations are generally overseen by a plurality of elders who are sometimes assisted in the administration of various works by deacons.[14][23]: 124 [24]: 47, 54–55   Elders are generally seen as responsible for the spiritual welfare of the congregation, while deacons are seen as responsible for the non-spiritual needs of the church.[54]: 531  Deacons serve under the supervision of the elders, and are often assigned to specific ministries.[54]: 531   Successful service as a deacon is often seen as preparation for the eldership.[54]: 531   Elders and deacons are appointed by the congregation based on the qualifications found in 1 Timothy 3 and Titus 1, including that the persons must be male (with female elders and deaconesses not recognized, as these are not found in Scripture).[24]: 53, 48–52 [55][56]: 323, 335  Congregations also typically apply a requirement that an elder has children who believe. Congregations look for elders who have a mature enough understanding of scripture to enable them to supervise the minister and to teach, as well as to perform "governance" functions.[57]: 298  In the absence of willing men who meet these qualifications, congregations are sometimes overseen by the congregation's men in general.[58]

While the early Restoration Movement had a tradition of itinerant preachers rather than "located Preachers", during the 20th century a long-term, formally trained congregational minister became the norm among Churches of Christ.[54]: 532  Ministers are understood to serve under the oversight of the elders[57]: 298  and may or may not also be qualified as an elder.  While the presence of a long-term professional minister has sometimes created "significant de facto ministerial authority" and led to conflict between the minister and the elders, the eldership has remained the "ultimate locus of authority in the congregation".[54]: 531   There is, however, a small segment of Churches of Christ who oppose the "located minister" concept (see below).

Churches of Christ hold to the priesthood of all believers.[59] No special titles are used for preachers or ministers that would identify them as "clergy".[21]: 106 [28]: 112–113   Many ministers have undergraduate or graduate education in religion, or specific training in preaching through a non-college school of preaching.[34]: 215 [54]: 531 [60]: 607 [61]: 672, 673   Churches of Christ emphasize that there is no distinction between "clergy" and "laity" and that every member has a gift and a role to play in accomplishing the work of the church.[62]: 38–40 

While there is an identifiable mainstream within the Churches of Christ, there are also significant variations within the fellowship.[18]: 212 [34]: 213 [63]: 31, 32 [64]: 4 [65]: 1, 2   The approach taken to restoring the New Testament church has focused on "methods and procedures" such as church organization, the form of worship, and how the church should function. As a result, most divisions among Churches of Christ have been the result of "methodological" disputes. These are meaningful to members of this movement because of the seriousness with which they take the goal of "restoring the form and structure of the primitive church".[18]: 212 

Three-quarters of the congregations and 87% of the membership are described by The Encyclopedia of the Stone–Campbell Movement as "mainstream", sharing a general consensus on practice and theology.[34]: 213 

Congregational a cappella music from hymnals (perhaps pitched from a pitch pipe), but directed by any capable song-leader motioning the time signature, is notably characteristic of the Churches of Christ.[22]: 240 [66]: 417 [67]  Few congregations clap hands or use musical instruments during "formal" weekly convocations.

The remaining congregations may be grouped into four categories which generally differ from the mainstream consensus in specific practices, rather than in theological perspectives, and tend to have smaller congregations on average.[34]: 213 

The largest of these four categories is the "non-institutional" Churches of Christ.  This group is notable for opposing congregational support of institutions such as orphanages and Bible colleges.  Similarly, non-institutional congregations also oppose the use of church facilities for non-church activities (such as fellowship dinners or recreation); as such, they oppose the construction of "fellowship halls", gymnasiums, and similar structures.  In both cases, opposition is based on the belief that support of institutions and non-church activities are not proper functions of the local congregation.  Approximately 2,055 congregations fall into this category.[34]: 213 [68]

The remaining three groups, whose congregations are generally considerably smaller than those of the mainstream or non-institutional groups, also oppose institutional support as well as "fellowship halls" and similar structures (for the same reasons as the non-institutional groups), but differ by other beliefs and practices (the groups often overlap, but in all cases hold to more conservative views than even the non-institutional groups):[34]: 213 

Churches of Christ seek to practice the principle of the Bible being the only source to find doctrine (known elsewhere as sola scriptura).[23]: 123 [69] The Bible is generally regarded as inspired and inerrant.[23]: 123  Churches of Christ generally see the Bible as historically accurate and literal, unless scriptural context obviously indicates otherwise. Regarding church practices, worship, and doctrine, there is great liberty from congregation to congregation in interpreting what is biblically permissible, as congregations are not controlled by a denominational hierarchy.[70] Their approach to the Bible is driven by the "assumption that the Bible is sufficiently plain and simple to render its message obvious to any sincere believer".[18]: 212  Related to this is an assumption that the Bible provides an understandable "blueprint" or "constitution" for the church.[18]: 213 

If it's not in the Bible, then these folks aren't going to do it.
Historically, three hermeneutic approaches have been used among Churches of Christ.[27]: 387 [71]

The relative importance given to each of these three strategies has varied over time and between different contexts.[71] The general impression in the current Churches of Christ is that the group's hermeneutics are entirely based on the command, example, inference approach.[71]  In practice, interpretation has been deductive, and heavily influenced by the group's central commitment to ecclesiology and soteriology.[71] Inductive reasoning has been used as well, as when all of the conversion accounts from the book of Acts are collated and analyzed to determine the steps necessary for salvation.[71]  One student of the movement summarized the traditional approach this way: "In most of their theologizing, however, my impression is that spokespersons in the Churches of Christ reason from Scripture in a deductive manner, arguing from one premise or hypothesis to another so as to arrive at a conclusion. In this regard the approach is much like that of science which, in practice moves deductively from one hypothesis to another, rather than in a Baconian inductive manner."[71]  In recent years, changes in the degree of emphasis placed on ecclesiology and soteriology has spurred a reexamination of the traditional hermeneutics among some associated with the Churches of Christ.[71]

A debate arose during the 1980s over the use of the command, example, necessary inference model for identifying the "essentials" of the New Testament faith. Some argued that it fostered legalism, and advocated instead a hermeneutic based on the character of God, Christ and the Holy Spirit. Traditionalists urged the rejection of this "new hermeneutic".[72]  Use of this tripartite formula has declined as congregations have shifted to an increased "focus on 'spiritual' issues like discipleship, servanthood, family and praise".[27]: 388   Relatively greater emphasis has been given to Old Testament studies in congregational Bible classes and at affiliated colleges in recent decades. While it is still not seen as authoritative for Christian worship, church organization, or regulating the Christian's life, some have argued that it is theologically authoritative.[27]: 388 

Many scholars associated with the Churches of Christ embrace the methods of modern Biblical criticism but not the associated anti-supernaturalistic views. More generally, the classical grammatico-historical method is prevalent, which provides a basis for some openness to alternative approaches to understanding the scriptures.[27]: 389 

Churches of Christ are strongly anti-Lutheran and anti-Calvinist in their understanding of salvation and generally present conversion as "obedience to the proclaimed facts of the gospel rather than as the result of an emotional, Spirit-initiated conversion".[34]: 215  Churches of Christ hold the view that humans of accountable age are lost because they have committed sins.[23]: 124  These lost souls can be redeemed because Jesus Christ, the Son of God, offered himself as the atoning sacrifice.[23]: 124  Children too young to understand right from wrong and make a conscious choice between the two are believed to be innocent of sin.[21]: 107 [23]: 124  There is no set age for this to occur; it is only when the child learns the difference between right and wrong that they are accountable (James 4:17). Congregations differ in their interpretation of the age of accountability.[21]: 107 

Churches of Christ generally teach that the process of salvation involves the following steps:[14]

Beginning in the 1960s, many preachers began placing more emphasis on the role of grace in salvation, instead of focusing exclusively on implementing all of the New Testament commands and examples.[64]: 152, 153   This was not an entirely new approach, as others had actively "affirmed a theology of free and unmerited grace", but it did represent a change of emphasis with grace becoming "a theme that would increasingly define this tradition".[64]: 153 

Baptism has been recognized as the important initiatory rite throughout the history of the Christian Church,[73]: 11  but Christian groups differ over the manner and time in which baptism is administered,[73]: 11  the meaning and significance of baptism,[73]: 11  its role in salvation,[73]: 12  and who is a candidate for baptism.[73]: 12 

Baptism in Churches of Christ is performed only by bodily immersion,[21]: 107 [23]: 124  based on the New Testament's use of the Koine Greek verb βαπτίζω (baptizō) which is understood to mean to dip, immerse, submerge or plunge.[14][24]: 313–314 [28]: 45–46 [73]: 139 [74]: 22   Immersion is seen as more closely conforming to the death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus than other modes of baptism.[14][24]: 314–316 [73]: 140   Churches of Christ argue that historically immersion was the mode used in the first century, and that pouring and sprinkling emerged later.[73]: 140  Over time these secondary modes came to replace immersion, in the State Churches of Europe.[73]: 140   Only those mentally capable of belief and repentance are baptized (e.g., infant baptism is not practiced).[14][23]: 124 [24]: 318–319 [56]: 195 

Churches of Christ have historically had the most conservative position on baptism among the various branches of the Restoration Movement, understanding that repentance and baptism by immersion are necessary parts of conversion.[75]: 61   The most significant disagreements concerned the extent to which a correct understanding of the role of baptism is necessary for its validity.[75]: 61  David Lipscomb argued that if a believer was baptized out of a desire to obey God, the baptism was valid, even if the individual did not fully understand the role baptism plays in salvation.[75]: 61  Austin McGary argued that to be valid, the convert must also understand that baptism is for the forgiveness of sins.[75]: 62   McGary's view became the prevailing one in the early 20th century, but the approach advocated by Lipscomb never totally disappeared.[75]: 62   More recently, the rise of the International Churches of Christ, who "reimmersed some who came into their fellowship, even those previously immersed 'for remission of sins' in a Church of Christ," has caused some to reexamine the question of rebaptism.[75]: 66 

Churches of Christ consistently teach that in baptism a believer surrenders his life in faith and obedience to God, and that God "by the merits of Christ's blood, cleanses one from sin and truly changes the state of the person from an alien to a citizen of God's kingdom. Baptism is not a human work; it is the place where God does the work that only God can do."[75]: 66  The term "alien" is used in reference to sinners as in Eph 2:12. Members consider baptism a passive act of faith rather than a meritorious work; it "is a confession that a person has nothing to offer God".[76]: 112  While Churches of Christ do not describe baptism as a "sacrament", their view of it can legitimately be described as "sacramental".[74]: 186 [75]: 66  They see the power of baptism coming from God, who uses baptism as a vehicle, rather than from the water or the act itself,[74]: 186  and understand baptism to be an integral part of the conversion process, rather than as only a symbol of conversion.[74]: 184  A recent trend is to emphasize the transformational aspect of baptism: instead of describing it as nothing more than a legal requirement or sign of something that happened in the past, it is seen as "the event that places the believer 'into Christ' where God does the ongoing work of transformation".[75]: 66  There is a minority that downplays the importance of baptism in order to avoid sectarianism, but the broader trend is to "reexamine the richness of the Biblical teaching of baptism and to reinforce its central and essential place in Christianity".[75]: 66 

Because of the belief that baptism is a necessary part of salvation, some Baptists hold that the Churches of Christ endorse the doctrine of baptismal regeneration.[77] However members of the Churches of Christ reject this, arguing that since faith and repentance are necessary, and that the cleansing of sins is by the blood of Christ through the grace of God, baptism is not an inherently redeeming ritual.[73]: 133 [77][78]: 630, 631   One author describes the relationship between faith and baptism this way, "Faith is the reason why a person is a child of God; baptism is the time at which one is incorporated into Christ and so becomes a child of God" (italics are in the source).[56]: 170   Baptism is understood as a confessional expression of faith and repentance,[56]: 179–182  rather than a "work" that earns salvation.[56]: 170 

 The Churches of Christ generally combine the lack of any historical evidence that the early church used musical instruments in its worship assemblies[13]: 47 [24]: 237–238 [66]: 415  with the New Testament's lack of scriptures authorizing the use of instruments in worship assemblies[14][24]: 244–246  to conclude that instruments should not be used today in corporate worship. Thus, they have typically practiced a cappella music in their worship assemblies.[14][22]: 240 [23]: 124 

The tradition of a cappella congregational singing in the Churches of Christ is deep rooted and the rich history of the practice stimulated the creation of many hymns in the early 20th century. Notable Churches of Christ hymn writers have included Albert Brumley ("I'll Fly Away") and Tillit S. Teddlie ("Worthy Art Thou"). More traditional Church of Christ hymns commonly are in the style of gospel hymnody. The hymnal Great Songs of the Church, which was first published in 1921 and has had many subsequent editions, is widely used in Churches of Christ.[79]

Scriptures cited to support the practice of a cappella worship include:

The use of musical instruments in worship was a divisive topic within the Stone–Campbell Movement from its earliest years, when some adherents opposed the practice on traditional grounds, while others may have relied on a cappella simply because they lacked access to musical instruments. Alexander Campbell opposed the use of instruments in worship. As early as 1855, some Restoration Movement churches were using organs or pianos, ultimately leading the Churches of Christ to separate from the groups that condoned instrumental music.[79] However, since the early 2000s, an increasing number of congregations within the Churches of Christ have begun using musical instruments in their worship assemblies. Some of these latter describe themselves as a "Church of Christ (Instrumental)".[22]: 240 [66]: 417 [80][81][82][65]: 667 

Many leaders argue that the Churches of Christ only follow the Bible and have no "theology".[83]: 737  Christian theology as classically understood – the systematic development of the classical doctrinal topics – is relatively recent and rare among this movement.[83]: 737   Because Churches of Christ reject all formalized creeds on the basis that they add to or detract from Scripture, they generally reject most conceptual doctrinal positions out of hand.[84]  Churches of Christ do tend to elaborate certain "driving motifs".[83]: 737   These are scripture (hermeneutics), the church (ecclesiology) and the "plan of salvation" (soteriology).[83]: 737  The importance of theology, understood as teaching or "doctrine", has been defended on the basis that an understanding of doctrine is necessary to respond intelligently to questions from others, to promote spiritual health, and to draw the believer closer to God.[76]: 10–11 

Churches of Christ avoid the term "theology", preferring instead the term "doctrine": theology is what humans say about the Bible; doctrine is simply what the Bible says.
Regarding eschatology (a branch of theology concerned with the final events in the history of the world or of humankind), Churches of Christ are generally amillennial, their originally prevalent postmillennialism (evident in Alexander Campbell's Millennial Harbinger) having dissipated around the era of the First World War. Before then, many leaders were "moderate historical premillennialists" who did not advocate specific historical interpretations. Churches of Christ have moved away from premillennialism as dispensational millennialism has come more to fore in Protestant evangelical circles.[34]: 219 [85] Amillennialism and postmillennialism are the prevailing views today.[23]: 125 

Premillennialism was a focus of controversy during the first half of the 20th century.[34]: 219   One of the most influential advocates for that point of view was Robert Henry Boll,[86]: 96–97 [87]: 306  whose eschatological views came to be most singularly opposed by Foy E. Wallace Jr.[88] By the end of the 20th century, however, the divisions caused by the debate over premillennialism were diminishing, and in the 2000 edition of the directory Churches of Christ in the United States, published by Mac Lynn, congregations holding premillennial views were no longer listed separately.[86]: 97 [89]

During the late 19th century, the prevailing view in the Restoration Movement was that the Holy Spirit currently acts only through the influence of inspired scripture.[90]  This rationalist view was associated with Alexander Campbell, who was "greatly affected by what he viewed as the excesses of the emotional camp meetings and revivals of his day".[90]  He believed that the Spirit draws people towards salvation but understood the Spirit to do this "in the same way any person moves another—by persuasion with words and ideas". This view came to prevail over that of Barton W. Stone, who believed the Spirit had a more direct role in the life of the Christian.[90]  Since the early 20th century, many, but not all, among the Churches of Christ have moved away from this "word-only" theory of the operation of the Holy Spirit.[91]  As one scholar of the movement puts it, "[f]or better or worse, those who champion the so-called word-only theory no longer have a hold on the minds of the constituency of Churches of Christ. Though relatively few have adopted outright charismatic and third wave views and remained in the body, apparently the spiritual waves have begun to erode that rational rock."[90] The Churches of Christ hold a cessationist perspective on the gifts of the Spirit.[citation needed][92]

Alexander Campbell and Barton W. Stone are recognized as two of the major Reformers of the so-called "Stone–Campbell Movement".  Barton Stone was staunchly non-trinitarian as he elucidates in his, "An Address to the Christian Churches in Kentucky, Tennessee, & Ohio On Several Important Doctrines of Religion[93]." Alexander Campbell, "rejected the term 'Trinity,' but Campbell did not reject the theological idea of the tri-unity of the Christian God."[94] The fact that these two movements merged into one shows that this was not a major point of contention, even if it was a point of disagreement.[95]

The fundamental idea of "restoration" or "Christian Primitivism" is that problems or deficiencies in the church can be corrected by using the primitive church as a "normative model".[96]: 635   The call for restoration is often justified on the basis of a "falling away" that corrupted the original purity of the church.[37][97][98]  This falling away is identified with the development of Catholicism and denominationalism.[24]: 56–66, 103–138 [37]: 54–73 [97][98]  New Testament verses that discuss future apostasy (2 Thessalonians 2:3) and heresy (e.g., Acts 20:29, 1 Timothy 4:1, 2 Tim 4:1–4:4) are understood to predict this falling away.[97]  The logic of "restoration" could imply that the "true" church completely disappeared and thus lead towards exclusivism.[98]  Another view of restoration is that the "true Church ... has always existed by grace and not by human engineering" (italics in the original).[99]: 640   In this view the goal is to "help Christians realize the ideal of the church in the New Testament – to restore the church as conceived in the mind of Christ" (italics in the original).[99]: 640  Early Restoration Movement leaders did not believe that the church had ceased to exist, but instead sought to reform and reunite the church.[98][99]: 638 [100][101]  A number of congregations' web sites explicitly state that the true church never disappeared.[102]  The belief in a general falling away is not seen as inconsistent with the idea that a faithful remnant of the church never entirely disappeared.[24]: 153 [37]: 5 [103]: 41  Some have attempted to trace this remnant through the intervening centuries between the New Testament and the beginning of the Restoration Movement in the early 1800s.[104][105]

One effect of the emphasis placed on the New Testament church is a "sense of historylessness" that sees the intervening history between the 1st century and the modern church as "irrelevant or even abhorrent."[15]: 152   Authors within the brotherhood have recently argued that a greater attention to history can help guide the church through modern-day challenges.[15]: 151–157 [106]: 60–64 

The churches of Christ maintain a significant proportion of political diversity.[107] According to the Pew Research Center in 2016, 50% of adherents of the churches of Christ identify as Republican or lean Republican, 39% identify as Democratic or lean Democratic and 11% have no preference.[108]  Despite this, the Christian Chronicle says that the vast majority of adherents maintain a conservative view on modern social issues. This is evident when the Research Center questioned adherents' political ideology. In the survey, 51% identified as "conservative", 29% identified as "moderate" and just 12% identified as "liberal", with 8% not knowing.[109] In contemporary society, the vast majority of adherents of the churches of Christ view homosexuality as a sin.[110] They cite Leviticus 18:22 and Romans 1:26–27 for their position. Most don't view same-sex attraction as a sin; however, they condemn "acting on same-sex desires".[111]

The Restoration Movement originated with the convergence of several independent efforts to go back to apostolic Christianity.[15]: 101 [36]: 27   Two were of particular importance to the development of the movement.[15]: 101–106 [36]: 27  The first, led by Barton W. Stone, began at Cane Ridge, Kentucky and called themselves simply "Christians". The second began in western Pennsylvania and was led by Thomas Campbell and his son, Alexander Campbell; they used the name "Disciples of Christ". Both groups sought to restore the whole Christian church on the pattern set forth in the New Testament, and both believed that creeds kept Christianity divided.[15]: 101–106 [36]: 27–32 

The Campbell movement was characterized by a "systematic and rational reconstruction" of the early church, in contrast to the Stone movement which was characterized by radical freedom and lack of dogma.[15]: 106–108   Despite their differences, the two movements agreed on several critical issues.[15]: 108  Both saw restoring the early church as a route to Christian freedom, and both believed that unity among Christians could be achieved by using apostolic Christianity as a model.[15]: 108   The commitment of both movements to restoring the early church and to uniting Christians was enough to motivate a union between many in the two movements.[64]: 8, 9   While emphasizing that the Bible is the only source to seek doctrine, an acceptance of Christians with diverse opinions was the norm in the quest for truth. "In essentials, unity; in non-essentials, liberty; in all things, love" was an oft-quoted slogan of the period.[112]  The Stone and Campbell movements merged in 1832.[36]: 28 [113]: 212 [114]: xxi [115]: xxxvii 

There are many similarities between the Churches of Christ and the Pilgrim Fathers and the Puritans, that settled in what is now Massachusetts in the early 1600s. Their first book published in America, The Bay Psalm Book, has a 40 page introduction outlining why the Puritans did not use any instruments of music in worship, no choirs, and no solos, citing the Command, Example and Necessary Inference form of establishing authority, familiar to the Churches of Christ. This form of establishing authority is traced back to Ulrich Zwingli in Zurich, Switzerland, who influenced the teachings of John Calvin in Geneva, Switzerland. John Knox took Zwingli's teachings to Scotland, which influenced the Church of Scotland, and the Presbyterian Church, into which Thomas Campbell and Alexander Campbell were born. The Congregational Church in England and Scotland in the late 1700s, differed little from the Churches of Christ today: Congregational organization, elders and deacons, priesthood of all believers, no instruments of music, and the establishment of authority and practice through Command, Example and Necessary Inference. They differed in their beliefs on infant baptism, weekly communion, the use of a catechism, closed communion, and predestination. 

The Restoration Movement began during, and was greatly influenced by, the Second Great Awakening.[116]: 368   While the Campbells resisted what they saw as the spiritual manipulation of the camp meetings, the Southern phase of the Awakening "was an important matrix of Barton Stone's reform movement" and shaped the evangelistic techniques used by both Stone and the Campbells.[116]: 368 

In 1906, the U.S. Religious Census listed the Christian Churches and the Churches of Christ as separate and distinct groups for the first time.[117]: 251  This was the recognition of a division that had been growing for years under the influence of conservatives such as Daniel Sommer, with reports of the division having been published as early as 1883.[117]: 252  The most visible distinction between the two groups was the rejection of musical instruments in the Churches of Christ. The controversy over musical instruments began in 1860 with the introduction of organs in some churches. More basic were differences in the underlying approach to Biblical interpretation. For the Churches of Christ, any practices not present in accounts of New Testament worship were not permissible in the church, and they could find no New Testament documentation of the use of instrumental music in worship. For the Christian Churches, any practices not expressly forbidden could be considered.[117]: 242–247  Another specific source of controversy was the role of missionary societies, the first of which was the American Christian Missionary Society, formed in October 1849.[118][119]  While there was no disagreement over the need for evangelism, many believed that missionary societies were not authorized by scripture and would compromise the autonomy of local congregations.[118]  This disagreement became another important factor leading to the separation of the Churches of Christ from the Christian Church.[118]  Cultural factors arising from the American Civil War also contributed to the division.[120]

Nothing in life has given me more pain in heart than the separation from those I have heretofore worked with and loved
In 1968, at the International Convention of Christian Churches (Disciples of Christ), those Christian Churches that favored a denominational structure, wished to be more ecumenical, and also accepted more of the modern liberal theology of various denominations, adopted a new "provisional design" for their work together, becoming the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ).[49]: 495  Those congregations that chose not to be associated with the new denominational organization continued as undenominational Christian churches and churches of Christ, completing a separation that had begun decades before.[49]: 407–409   The instrumental Christian Churches and Churches of Christ in some cases have both organizational and hermeneutical differences with the Churches of Christ.[18]: 186   For example, they have a loosely organized convention and view scriptural silence on an issue more permissively,[18]: 186  but they are more closely related to the Churches of Christ in their theology and ecclesiology than they are with the Disciples of Christ denomination.[18]: 186  Some see divisions in the movement as the result of the tension between the goals of restoration and ecumenism, with the a cappella Churches of Christ and Christian churches and churches of Christ resolving the tension by stressing Bible authority, while the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) resolved the tension by stressing ecumenism.[18]: 210 [49]: 383 

Early Restoration Movement leaders varied in their views of slavery, reflecting the range of positions common in the Pre-Civil-War U.S.[122]: 619  Barton W. Stone was a strong opponent of slavery, arguing that there was no Biblical justification for the form of slavery then being practiced in the United States and calling for immediate emancipation.[122]: 619  Alexander Campbell represented a more "Jeffersonian" opposition to slavery, writing of it as more of a political problem than as a religious or moral one.[122]: 619   Having seen Methodists and Baptists divide over the issue of slavery, Campbell argued that scripture regulated slavery rather than prohibited it, and that abolition should not be allowed to become an issue over which Christians would break fellowship with each other.[122]: 619   Like the country as a whole, the assumption of white racial superiority was almost universal among those on all sides of the issue, and it was common for congregations to have separate seating for black members.[122]: 619 

After the Civil War, black Christians who had been worshiping in mixed-race Restoration Movement congregations formed their own congregations.[122]: 619   White members of Restoration Movement congregations shared many of the racial prejudices of the times.[122]: 620  Among the Churches of Christ, Marshall Keeble became a prominent African-American evangelist. He estimated that by January 1919 he had "traveled 23,052 miles, preached 1,161 sermons, and baptized 457 converts".[122]: 620 

To object to any child of God participating in the service on account of his race, social or civil state, his color or race, is to object to Jesus Christ and to cast him from our association. It is a fearful thing to do. I have never attended a church that negroes did not attend. 
During the Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s and 1960s the Churches of Christ struggled with changing racial attitudes.[122]: 621   Some leaders, such as Foy E. Wallace Jr., and George S. Benson of Harding University railed against racial integration, saying that racial segregation was the Divine Order.[124][125] Schools and colleges associated with the movement were at the center of the debate.[122]: 621  N.B. Hardeman, the president of Freed-Hardeman, was adamant that the black and white races should not mingle, and refused to shake hands with black Christians.[125] Abilene Christian College first admitted black undergraduate students in 1962 (graduate students had been admitted in 1961).[122]: 621   Desegregation of other campuses followed.[122]: 621 [126]

Efforts to address racism continued through the following decades.[122]: 622   A national meeting of prominent leaders from the Churches of Christ was held in June 1968.[122]: 622   Thirty-two participants signed a set of proposals intended to address discrimination in local congregations, church affiliated activities and the lives of individual Christians.[122]: 622   An important symbolic step was taken in 1999 when the president of Abilene Christian University "confessed the sin of racism in the school's past segregationist policies" and asked black Christians for forgiveness during a lectureship at Southwestern Christian College, a historically black school affiliated with the Churches of Christ.[122]: 622 [127]: 695 

After World War II, Churches of Christ began sending ministers and humanitarian relief to war-torn Europe and Asia.

Though there was agreement that separate para-church "missionary societies" could not be established (on the belief that such work could only be performed through local congregations), a doctrinal conflict ensued about how this work was to be done. Eventually, the funding and control of outreach programs in the United States such as homes for orphans, nursing homes, mission work, setting up new congregations, Bible colleges or seminaries, and large-scale radio and television programs became part of the controversy.

Congregations which supported and participated in pooling funds for these institutional activities are said to be "sponsoring church" congregations. Congregations which have traditionally opposed these organized sponsorship activities are said to be "non-institutional" congregations. The institutional controversy resulted in the largest division among Churches of Christ in the 20th century.[128]

The International Churches of Christ had their roots in a "discipling" movement that arose among the mainline Churches of Christ during the 1970s.[129]: 418   This discipling movement developed in the campus ministry of Chuck Lucas.[129]: 418 

In 1967, Chuck Lucas was minister of the 14th Street Church of Christ in Gainesville, Florida (later renamed the Crossroads Church of Christ). That year he started a new project known as Campus Advance (based on principles borrowed from the Campus Crusade and the Shepherding Movement). Centered on the University of Florida, the program called for a strong evangelical outreach and an intimate religious atmosphere in the form of soul talks and prayer partners.  Soul talks were held in student residences and involved prayer and sharing overseen by a leader who delegated authority over group members.  Prayer partners referred to the practice of pairing a new Christian with an older guide for personal assistance and direction. Both procedures led to "in-depth involvement of each member in one another's lives", and critics accused Lucas of fostering cultism.[130]

The Crossroads Movement later spread into some other Churches of Christ. One of Lucas' converts, Kip McKean, moved to the Boston area in 1979 and began working with "would-be disciples" in the Lexington Church of Christ.[129]: 418   He asked them to "redefine their commitment to Christ," and introduced the use of discipling partners. The congregation grew rapidly, and was renamed the Boston Church of Christ.[129]: 418  In the early 1980s, the focus of the movement moved to Boston, Massachusetts where Kip McKean and the Boston Church of Christ became prominently associated with the trend.[129]: 418 [130]: 133, 134  With the national leadership located in Boston, during the 1980s it commonly became known as the "Boston movement".[129]: 418 [130]: 133, 134   A formal break was made from the mainline Churches of Christ in 1993 with the organization of the International Churches of Christ.[129]: 418   This new designation formalized a division that was already in existence between those involved with the Crossroads/Boston Movement and "mainline" Churches of Christ.[49]: 442 [129]: 418, 419  Other names that have been used for this movement include the "Crossroads movement", "Multiplying Ministries", the "Discipling Movement" and the "Boston Church of Christ".[130]: 133 

Kip McKean resigned as the "World Mission Evangelist" in November 2002.[129]: 419   Some ICoC leaders began  "tentative efforts" at reconciliation with the Churches of Christ during the Abilene Christian University Lectureship in February 2004.[129]: 419 

Most members of the Churches of Christ live outside the United States. Although there is no reliable counting system, it is anecdotally believed there may be more than 1,000,000 members of the Churches of Christ in Africa, approximately 1,000,000 in India, and 50,000 in Central and South America. Total worldwide membership is over 3,000,000, with approximately 1,000,000 in the U.S.[34]: 212 

Although there is no reliable counting system, it is anecdotally believed to be 1,000,000 or more members of the Churches of Christ in Africa.[34]: 212   The total number of congregations is approximately 14,000.[131]: 7   The most significant concentrations are in Nigeria, Malawi, Ghana, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Ethiopia, South Africa, South Sudan and Kenya.[131]: 7 

Estimates are that there are 2,000 or more Restoration Movement congregations in India,[132]: 37, 38  with a membership of approximately 1,000,000.[34]: 212  More than 100 congregations exist in the Philippines.[132]: 38   Growth in other Asian countries has been smaller but is still significant.[132]: 38 

Historically, Restoration Movement groups from Great Britain were more influential than those from the United States in the early development of the movement in Australia. Churches of Christ grew up independently in several locations.[133]: 47  While early Churches of Christ in Australia saw creeds as divisive, towards the end of the 19th century they began viewing "summary statements of belief" as useful in tutoring second generation members and converts from other religious groups.[133]: 50   The period from 1875 through 1910 also saw debates over the use of musical instruments in worship, Christian Endeavor Societies and Sunday Schools. Ultimately, all three found general acceptance in the movement.[133]: 51  Currently, the Restoration Movement is not as divided in Australia as it is in the United States.[133]: 53  There have been strong ties with the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), but many conservative ministers and congregations associate with the Christian churches and churches of Christ instead.[133]: 53   Others have sought support from non-instrumental Churches of Christ, particularly those who felt that "conference" congregations had "departed from the restoration ideal".[133]: 53 

A relatively small proportion of total membership comes from Canada. A growing portion of the Canadian demographic is made up of immigrant members of the church. This is partly the result of Canadian demographics as a whole, and partly due to decreased interest amongst late generation Canadians.[134] The largest concentration of active congregations in Canada are in Southern Ontario, with notable congregations gathering in Beamsville, Bramalea, Niagara Falls, Vineland, Toronto (several), and Waterloo. However, many congregations of various sizes (typically under 300 members) meet all across Canada.[135]

In the early 1800s, Scottish Baptists were influenced by the writings of Alexander Campbell in the Christian Baptist and Millennial Harbinger.[136]  A group in Nottingham withdrew from the Scotch Baptist church in 1836 to form a Church of Christ.[136]: 369   James Wallis, a member of that group, founded a magazine named The British Millennial Harbinger in 1837.[136]: 369   In 1842 the first Cooperative Meeting of Churches of Christ in Great Britain was held in Edinburgh.[136]: 369   Approximately 50 congregations were involved, representing a membership of 1,600.[136]: 369   The name "Churches of Christ" was formally adopted at an annual meeting in 1870.[136]: 369  Alexander Campbell influenced the British Restoration Movement indirectly through his writings; he visited Britain for several months in 1847, and "presided at the Second Cooperative Meeting of the British Churches at Chester".[136]: 369   At that time the movement had grown to encompass 80 congregations with a total membership of 2,300.[136]: 369   Annual meetings were held after 1847.[136]: 369 

The use of instrumental music in worship was not a source of division among the Churches of Christ in Great Britain before World War I. More significant was the issue of pacifism; a national conference was established in 1916 for congregations that opposed the war.[136]: 371   A conference for "Old Paths" congregations was first held in 1924.[136]: 371   The issues involved included concern that the Christian Association was compromising traditional principles in seeking ecumenical ties with other organizations and a sense that it had abandoned Scripture as "an all-sufficient rule of faith and practice".[136]: 371   Two "Old Paths" congregations withdrew from the Association in 1931; an additional two withdrew in 1934, and nineteen more withdrew between 1943 and 1947.[136]: 371 

Membership declined rapidly during and after the First World War.[136]: 372 [137]: 312   The Association of Churches of Christ in Britain disbanded in 1980.[136]: 372 [137]: 312   Most Association congregations (approximately 40) united with the United Reformed Church in 1981.[136]: 372 [137]: 312   In the same year, twenty-four other congregations formed a Fellowship of Churches of Christ.[136]: 372   The Fellowship developed ties with the Christian churches and churches of Christ during the 1980s.[136]: 372 [137]: 312 

The Fellowship of Churches of Christ and some Australian and New Zealand Churches advocate a "missional" emphasis with an ideal of "Five Fold Leadership". Many people in more traditional Churches of Christ see these groups as having more in common with Pentecostal churches. The main publishing organs of traditional Churches of Christ in Britain are The Christian Worker magazine and the Scripture Standard magazine. A history of the Association of Churches of Christ, Let Sects and Parties Fall, was written by David M Thompson.[138] Further information can be found in the Historical Survey of Churches of Christ in the British Isles, edited by Joe Nisbet.[139]

In Brazil there are above 600 congregations and 100,000 members from the Restoration Movement. Most of them were established by Lloyd David Sanders.[140]

Categories