Philosophical novelTheological fiction

The Brothers Karamazov (‹The template Lang-rus is being considered for deletion.› Russian: Братья Карамазовы, romanized: Brat'ya Karamazovy, IPA: [ˈbratʲjə kərɐˈmazəvɨ]), also translated as The Karamazov Brothers, is the last novel by Russian author Fyodor Dostoevsky. Dostoevsky spent nearly two years writing The Brothers Karamazov, which was published as a serial in The Russian Messenger from January 1879 to November 1880. Dostoevsky died less than four months after its publication. It has been acclaimed as one of the supreme achievements in world literature.

Set in 19th-century Russia, The Brothers Karamazov is a passionate philosophical novel that discusses questions of God, free will, and morality. It has also been described as a theological drama[1] dealing with problems of faith, doubt, and reason in the context of a modernizing Russia, with a plot that revolves around the subject of patricide. Dostoevsky composed much of the novel in Staraya Russa, which inspired the main setting.[2]

Background

Although Dostoevsky began his first notes for The Brothers Karamazov in April 1878, the novel incorporated elements and themes from an earlier unfinished project he had begun in 1869 entitled The Life of a Great Sinner.[3] Another unfinished project, Drama in Tobolsk (Драма. В Тобольске), is considered to be the first draft of the first chapter of The Brothers Karamazov. Dated 13 September 1874, it tells of a fictional murder in Staraya Russa committed by a praporshchik named Dmitry Ilynskov (based on a real soldier from Omsk), who is thought to have murdered his father. It goes on to note that the father's body was suddenly discovered in a pit under a house.[4] The similarly unfinished Sorokoviny (Сороковины), dated 1 August 1875, is reflected in book IX, chapter 3–5 and book XI, chapter nine.[5]

In the October 1877 Writer's Diary article "To the Reader", Dostoevsky mentions a "literary work that has imperceptibly and involuntarily been taking shape within me over these two years of publishing the Diary." The Diary covered a multitude of themes and issues, some of which would be explored in greater depth in The Brothers Karamazov. These include patricide, law and order, and a variety of social problems.[6]

The writing of The Brothers Karamazov was altered by a personal tragedy: in May 1878, Dostoevsky's 3-year-old son Alyosha died of epilepsy,[7] a condition inherited from his father. The novelist's grief is apparent throughout the book. Dostoevsky named the hero Alyosha, as well as imbuing him with qualities that he sought and most admired. His loss is also reflected in the story of Captain Snegiryov and his young son Ilyusha.

The death of his son brought Dostoevsky to the Optina Monastery later that year. There he found inspiration for several aspects of The Brothers Karamazov, though at the time he intended to write a novel about childhood instead. Parts of the biographical section of Zosima's life are based on "The Life of the Elder Leonid", a text he found at Optina.[8]

Major characters

Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov

Fyodor Pavlovich, a 55-year-old sensualist and compulsive liar, is the father of three sons—Dmitri, Ivan and Alexei—from two marriages. He is rumored to have also fathered an illegitimate son, Pavel Fyodorovich Smerdyakov, whom he employs as his servant. Fyodor Pavlovich takes no interest in any of his sons at their birth, who are, as a result, raised apart from each other and their father. The relationship between Fyodor and his adult sons drives much of the plot in the novel.

Dmitri Fyodorovich Karamazov

Dmitri Fyodorovich (often referred to as Mitya) is Fyodor Karamazov's eldest son and the only offspring of his first marriage, with Adelaida Ivanovna Miusov. Dmitri is considered to be a sensualist, like his father, and regularly indulges in alcoholism and carousing. Dmitri is brought into contact with his family when he finds himself in need of his inheritance, which he believes is being withheld by his father. He was engaged to be married to Katerina Ivanovna, but breaks that off after falling in love with Grushenka. Dmitri's relationship with his father is the most volatile of the brothers, escalating to violence as he and his father begin fighting over his inheritance and Grushenka. While he maintains a relationship with Ivan, he is closest to his younger brother Alyosha, referring to him as his "cherub".

The character of Dmitri was initially inspired by a convict, D.I. Ilyinsky, whom Dostoevsky met while in prison in Siberia. Ilyinsky, who is described in Dostoevsky's memoir-novel Notes from the House of the Dead as "always in the liveliest, merriest spirits", was in prison for murdering his father in order to obtain his inheritance, although he always steadfastly maintained his innocence. He was later freed after another man confessed to the crime.[9]

Ivan Fyodorovich Karamazov

Ivan Fyodorovich (sometimes also referred to as Vanya) is the 24-year-old middle son, and the first from Fyodor Pavlovich's second marriage. Ivan is reserved and aloof, but also intellectually brilliant. His dictum "if there is no God, everything is lawful" is a recurring motif in the novel. At first, Ivan seems not to have much time for his brother Alyosha, but later their bond and mutual affection deepens. He finds his father repulsive, and also has a strong antipathy towards Dmitri. Fyodor Pavlovich tells Alyosha that he fears Ivan more than he fears Dmitri. Ivan falls in love with Katerina Ivanovna, but their intimacy develops in the shadow of her prior connection to Dmitri, and her ambivalence is a source of torment to him.

Some of the most acclaimed passages of the novel involve Ivan, including the chapters "Rebellion" and "The Grand Inquisitor" from Book V, and the three conversations with Smerdyakov and the subsequent chapter "Ivan's nightmare of the devil" in Book XI. Book V, entitled "Pro and Contra", is primarily about "the inner debate taking place in Ivan between his recognition of the moral sublimity of the Christian ideal and his outrage against a universe of pain and suffering."[10] Ivan's rejection of God is posited in terms of the Christian value of compassion—the value that Dostoevsky himself (through the character of Prince Myshkin in The Idiot) called "the chief and perhaps the only law of all human existence."[10] Thus Ivan's rejection of God is justified by the very principle at the heart of Christianity. For Ivan the absurdity of all human history is proven by the senselessness of the suffering of children: if reason or rationality is the measure, God's world cannot be accepted. All the examples Ivan gives of horrors perpetrated against children were taken by Dostoevsky from actual newspaper accounts and historical sources.[11]

Alexei Fyodorovich Karamazov

Alexei Fyodorovich (often referred to as Alyosha) is, at age 20, the youngest of the brothers. He is the second child of Fyodor Pavlovich's second wife, Sofya Ivanovna, and is thus Ivan's full brother. The narrator identifies him as the hero of the novel in the opening chapter, as does the author in the preface. At the outset of the events, Alyosha is a novice in the local Russian Orthodox monastery. His faith is in contrast to his brother Ivan's atheism. The Elder, Father Zosima, who is a father figure and spiritual guide to Alyosha throughout the book, sends him into the world, where he becomes involved with the extreme personalities and fraught relationships in his family and elsewhere. At all times he acts as a compassionate and insightful peace maker, and is loved by virtually everyone.

In creating the character of Alyosha, Dostoevsky was in large part addressing himself to the contemporary Russian radical youth, as a positive alternative to the atheistic approach to justice and attainment of the good. Alyosha embodies the same aspiration to a society governed by goodness and compassion that is contained in the Socialist ideal, but not divorced from faith in God, from faith in the immortality of the soul in God, or from the Orthodox Christian tradition in Russia.[12]

Pavel Fyodorovich Smerdyakov

Pavel Fyodorovich Smerdyakov is the son of "Reeking Lizaveta", a mute woman of the street who died alone giving birth to the child in Fyodor Pavlovich's bathhouse: the name "Smerdyakov" means "son of the reeking one". He is rumored to be the illegitimate son of Fyodor Pavlovich.  He was brought up by Fyodor Pavlovich's trusted servant Grigory Vasilievich and his wife Marfa. Grigory tutored him and attempted to give him religious instruction, but Smerdyakov responded with ingratitude and derision. On one occasion Grigory had struck him violently across the face: a week later Smerdyakov had his first epileptic seizure. The narrator notes that as a child, Smerdyakov was fond of hanging cats and giving them ritualistic burials. Grigory told him: "You're not human. You're the spawn of the mildew on the bathhouse wall, that's who you are"—a remark for which Smerdyakov never forgave him. Smerdyakov becomes part of the Karamazov household as a servant, working as Fyodor Pavlovich's lackey and cook. Generally contemptuous of others, Smerdyakov greatly admires Ivan, shares his atheism, and is influenced by his dictum that "everything is lawful". Despite his evident shrewdness, other characters—particularly Ivan, Dmitri and Fyodor Pavlovich—underestimate his intelligence.

Agrafena Alexandrovna Svetlova

Agrafena Alexandrovna Svetlova, usually referred to as 'Grushenka', is a beautiful and fiery 22-year-old woman with an uncanny charm for men. In her youth she was jilted by a Polish officer and subsequently came under the protection of a tyrannical miser. The episode leaves Grushenka with an urge for independence and control of her life. Grushenka inspires complete admiration and lust in both Fyodor and Dmitri Karamazov. Their rivalry for her affection becomes the main focus of their conflict, a state of affairs that Grushenka is happy to take advantage of for her own satisfaction and amusement. Belatedly, she realizes that she truly loves Dmitri, and becomes ashamed of her cruelty. Her growing friendship with Alyosha leads her toward a path of spiritual redemption, and hidden qualities of gentleness and generosity emerge, though her fiery temper and pride remain intact.

Katerina Ivanovna Verkhovtseva

Katerina Ivanovna (sometimes referred to as Katya) is Dmitri's beautiful fiancée, despite his open forays with Grushenka. Her engagement to Dmitri is chiefly a matter of pride on both their parts, Dmitri having bailed her father out of a debt. Katerina is extremely proud and seeks to act as a noble martyr. Because of this, she cannot bring herself to act on her love for Ivan, and constantly creates moral barriers between him and herself.

Father Zosima, the Elder

Father Zosima is an Elder and spiritual advisor (starets) in the town monastery and Alyosha's teacher. He is something of a celebrity among the townspeople for his reputed prophetic and healing abilities. His spiritual status inspires both admiration and jealousy among his fellow monks. Zosima provides a refutation to Ivan's atheistic arguments and helps to explain Alyosha's character. Zosima's teachings shape the way Alyosha deals with the young boys he meets in the Ilyusha storyline.

Dostoevsky's intent with the character of Zosima (as with Alyosha) was to portray the Church as a positive social ideal. The character was to some extent based on Father Ambrose of the Optina Monastery, who Dostoevsky had met on a visit to the monastery in 1878. For Zosima's teachings in Book VI, "The Russian Monk", Dostoevsky wrote that the prototype is taken from certain teachings of Tikhon of Zadonsk and "the naïveté of style from the monk Parfeny's book of wanderings".[13] The style and tone in Book VI, where Zosima narrates, is markedly different from the rest of the novel. V. L. Komarovich suggests that the rhythm of the prose is "a departure from all the norms of modern syntax, and at the same time imparts to the entire narration a special, emotional colouring of ceremonial and ideal tranquility."[14]

Ilyusha

Ilyusha (sometimes called Ilyushechka) is a local schoolboy, and the central figure of a crucial subplot in the novel. Dmitri assaults and humiliates his father, the impoverished officer Captain Snegiryov, who has been hired by Fyodor Pavlovich to threaten Dmitri over his debts, and the Snegiryov family is brought to shame as a result.

Synopsis

Book One: A Nice Little Family

The opening of the novel introduces the Karamazov family and relates the story of their distant and recent past. The details of Fyodor Pavlovich's two marriages, as well as his indifference to the upbringing of his three children, is chronicled. The narrator also establishes the widely varying personalities of the three brothers and the circumstances that have led to their return to their father's town. The first book concludes by describing the mysterious Eastern Orthodox tradition of the Elders. Alyosha has become devoted to the Elder at the local monastery.

Book Two: An Inappropriate Gathering

Book Two begins as the Karamazov family arrives at the monastery so that the Elder Zosima can act as a mediator between Dmitri and his father in their dispute over the inheritance. It was the father's idea, apparently as a joke, to have the meeting take place in such a holy place in the presence of the famous Elder. Fyodor Pavlovich's deliberately insulting and provocative behaviour destroys any chance of conciliation, and the meeting only results in intensified hatred and a scandal. This book also contains a scene in which the Elder Zosima consoles a woman mourning the death of her three-year-old son. The poor woman's grief parallels Dostoevsky's own tragedy at the loss of his young son Alyosha.

Book Three: Sensualists

The third book provides more details of the love triangle among Fyodor Pavlovich, his son Dmitri, and Grushenka. Dmitri hides near his father's home to see if Grushenka will arrive. His personality is explored in a long conversation with Alyosha. Later that evening, Dmitri bursts into his father's house and assaults him. As he leaves, he threatens to come back and kill him. This book also introduces Smerdyakov and his origins, as well as the story of his mother, Lizaveta Smerdyashchaya. At the conclusion of this book, Alyosha is witness to Grushenka's humiliation of Dmitri's betrothed Katerina Ivanovna.

Book Four: Lacerations/Strains

This section introduces a side story which resurfaces in more detail later in the novel. It begins with Alyosha observing a group of schoolboys throwing rocks at one of their sickly peers named Ilyusha. When Alyosha admonishes the boys and tries to help, Ilyusha bites Alyosha's finger. It is later learned that Ilyusha's father, a former staff-captain named Snegiryov, was assaulted by Dmitri, who dragged him by the beard out of a bar. Alyosha soon learns of the further hardships present in the Snegiryov household and offers the former staff captain money as an apology for his brother and to help Snegiryov's ailing wife and children. After initially accepting the money with joy, Snegiryov throws it to the ground and stomps it into the sand, before running back into his home.

Book Five: Pro and Contra

Here, the rationalist and nihilistic ideology that permeated Russia at this time is defended and espoused by Ivan Karamazov while meeting his brother Alyosha at a restaurant. In the chapter titled "Rebellion", Ivan proclaims that he rejects the world that God has created because it is built on a foundation of suffering. In perhaps the most famous chapter in the novel, "The Grand Inquisitor", Ivan narrates to Alyosha his imagined poem that describes an encounter between a leader from the Spanish Inquisition and Jesus, who has made his return to Earth. The opposition between reason and faith is dramatised and symbolised in a forceful monologue of the Grand Inquisitor who, having ordered the arrest of Jesus, visits him in prison at night.

Why hast Thou come now to hinder us? For Thou hast come to hinder us, and Thou knowest that...We are working not with Thee but with him [Satan]...We took from him what Thou didst reject with scorn, that last gift he offered Thee, showing Thee all the kingdoms of the earth. We took from him Rome and the sword of Caesar, and proclaimed ourselves sole rulers of the earth...We shall triumph and shall be Caesars, and then we shall plan the universal happiness of man.

The Grand Inquisitor accuses Jesus of having inflicted on humankind the "burden" of free will. At the end of the Grand Inquisitor's lengthy arguments, Jesus silently steps forward and kisses the old man on the lips. The Inquisitor, stunned and moved, tells him he must never come there again, and lets him out. Alyosha, after hearing the story, goes to Ivan and kisses him softly on the lips. Ivan shouts with delight. The brothers part with mutual affection and respect.

Book Six: The Russian Monk

The sixth book relates the life and history of the Elder Zosima as he lies near death in his cell. Zosima explains that he found his faith in his rebellious youth, after an unforgivable action toward his trusted servant, consequently deciding to become a monk. Zosima preaches people must forgive others by acknowledging their own sins and guilt before others. He explains that no sin is isolated, making everyone responsible for their neighbor's sins. Zosima represents a philosophy that responds to Ivan's, which had challenged God's creation in the previous book.

Book Seven: Alyosha

The book begins immediately following the death of Zosima. It is a commonly held perception in the town and the monastery that true holy men's bodies are incorrupt, i.e., they do not succumb to putrefaction. Thus, the expectation concerning the Elder Zosima is that his deceased body will not decompose. It therefore comes as a great shock that Zosima's body not only decays, but begins the process almost immediately following his death. Within the first day, the smell is already unbearable. For many this calls into question their previous respect and admiration for Zosima. Alyosha is particularly devastated by the sullying of Zosima's name due to nothing more than the corruption of his dead body. One of Alyosha's companions in the monastery—Rakitin—uses Alyosha's vulnerability to set up a meeting between him and Grushenka. However, instead of Alyosha becoming corrupted, he acquires new faith and hope from Grushenka, while Grushenka's troubled mind begins the path of spiritual redemption through his influence: they become close friends. The book ends with the spiritual regeneration of Alyosha as he embraces and kisses the earth outside the monastery (echoing, perhaps, Zosima's last earthly act before his death) and cries convulsively. Renewed, he goes back out into the world, as his Elder instructed.

Book Eight: Mitya

This section deals primarily with Dmitri's wild and distraught pursuit of money for the purpose of running away with Grushenka. Dmitri owes money to his fiancée Katerina Ivanovna, and will believe himself to be a thief if he does not find the money to pay her back before embarking on his quest for Grushenka. Dmitri approaches Grushenka's benefactor, Samsonov, who sends him to a neighboring town on a fabricated promise of a business deal. All the while Dmitri is petrified that Grushenka may go to his father and marry him because of his wealth and lavish promises. When Dmitri returns from his failed dealing in the neighboring town, he escorts Grushenka to her benefactor's home, but later discovers that she has deceived him and left early. Furious, he runs to his father's home with a brass pestle in his hand, and spies on him from the window. He takes the pestle from his pocket. There is a discontinuity in the action, and Dmitri is suddenly running from his father's property. The servant Gregory tries to stop him, yelling "Parricide!", but Dmitri hits him in the head with the pestle. Dmitri, afraid that the blow might have killed Grigori, tries to attend to the wound with his handkerchief, but gives up and runs away.

Dmitri is next seen in a daze on the street, covered in blood, with a pile of money in his hand. He soon learns that Grushenka's former betrothed has returned and taken her to a nearby lodge. Upon learning this, Dmitri loads a cart with food and wine and pays for a huge orgy to finally confront Grushenka in the presence of her old flame, intending all the while to kill himself at dawn. The "first and rightful lover" is a boorish Pole who cheats the party at a game of cards. When his deception is revealed, he flees, and Grushenka soon reveals to Dmitri that she really is in love with him.  The party rages on, and just as Dmitri and Grushenka are making plans to marry, the police enter the lodge and inform Dmitri that he is under arrest for the murder of his father.

Book Nine: The Preliminary Investigation

Book Nine introduces the details of Fyodor Pavlovich's murder and describes the interrogation of Dmitri, who vigorously maintains his innocence. The alleged motive for the crime is robbery. Dmitri was known to have been completely destitute earlier that evening, but is suddenly seen with thousands of rubles shortly after his father's murder. Meanwhile, the three thousand rubles that Fyodor Pavlovich had set aside for Grushenka have disappeared. Dmitri explains that the money he spent that evening came from three thousand rubles that Katerina Ivanovna gave him to send to her sister. He spent half that at his first meeting with Grushenka—another drunken orgy—and sewed up the rest in a cloth, intending to give it back to Katerina Ivanovna. The investigators are not convinced by this. All of the evidence points toward Dmitri; the only other person in the house at the time of the murder, apart from Gregory and his wife, was Smerdyakov, who was incapacitated due to an epileptic seizure he suffered the day before. As a result of the overwhelming evidence against him, Dmitri is formally charged with the murder and taken away to prison to await trial.

Book Ten: Boys

Boys continues the story of the schoolboys and Ilyusha last referred to in Book Four. The book begins with the introduction of the young boy Kolya Krasotkin. Kolya is a brilliant boy who proclaims his atheism, socialism, and beliefs in the ideas of Europe. Dostoevsky uses Kolya's beliefs, especially in a conversation with Alyosha, to satirize his Westernizer critics by putting their words and beliefs in the mouth of a young boy who doesn't really understand what he is talking about. Kolya is bored with life and constantly torments his mother by putting himself in danger. As part of a prank Kolya lies between railroad tracks as a train passes over and becomes something of a legend for the feat. All the other boys look up to Kolya, especially Ilyusha. Since the narrative left Ilyusha in Book Four, his illness has progressively worsened and the doctor states that he will not recover. Kolya and Ilyusha had a falling out over Ilyusha's maltreatment of a local dog: Ilyusha had fed it a piece of bread in which he had placed a pin, at the bidding of Smerdyakov. But thanks to Alyosha's intervention the other schoolboys have gradually reconciled with Ilyusha, and Kolya soon joins them at his bedside. It is here that Kolya first meets Alyosha and begins to reassess his nihilist beliefs.

Book Eleven: Brother Ivan Fyodorovich

Book Eleven chronicles Ivan Fyodorovich's influence on those around him and his descent into madness. It is in this book that Ivan meets three times with Smerdyakov, desperately seeking to solve the riddle of the murder and whether Smerdyakov, and consequently he himself, had anything to do with it. In the final meeting Smerdyakov confesses that he had faked the fit, murdered Fyodor Pavlovich, and stolen the money, which he presents to Ivan. Smerdyakov expresses disbelief at Ivan's professed ignorance and surprise. Smerdyakov claims that Ivan was complicit in the murder by telling Smerdyakov when he would be leaving Fyodor Pavlovich's house, and more importantly by instilling in Smerdyakov the belief that, in a world without God, "everything is permitted." The book ends with Ivan having a hallucination in which he is visited by the devil, in the form of an idle and parasitic former gentleman,  who torments him by personifying and caricaturing his thoughts and ideas. The nightmare is interrupted by a knocking at the window: it is Alyosha, who has come to inform him that Smerdyakov has hanged himself. Although the devil disappears, Ivan remains in a delirium and converses irrationally. Alyosha is shocked at his brother's condition and tries to pacify him, but Ivan's ravings become increasingly incoherent. Eventually he falls into a deep sleep.

Book Twelve: A Judicial Error

This book details the trial of Dmitri Karamazov for the murder of his father. The courtroom drama is sharply satirized by Dostoevsky. The men in the crowd are presented as resentful and spiteful, and the women as irrationally drawn to the romanticism of Dmitri's love triangle with Katerina and Grushenka. Ivan's madness takes its final hold over him and he is carried away from the courtroom after his attempt to give evidence about Smerdyakov descends into incomprehensible raving. The turning point in the trial is Katerina's damning testimony. Shocked by Ivan's madness, she passionately defends him and abandons her 'honourable' approach to Dmitri. She produces a letter drunkenly written by Dmitri saying that he would kill his father. The section concludes with lengthy and impassioned closing remarks from the prosecutor and the defence counsel and the verdict that Dmitri is guilty.

Epilogue

The final section opens with discussion of a plan developed for Dmitri's escape from his sentence of twenty years of hard labor in Siberia. The plan is never fully described, but it seems to involve Ivan and Katerina bribing some guards. Alyosha cautiously approves, because he feels that Dmitri is not emotionally ready to submit to such a harsh sentence, that he is innocent, and that no guards or officers would suffer for aiding the escape. Dmitri and Grushenka plan to escape to America and work the land there for several years, and then return to Russia under assumed American names, because they cannot imagine living without Russia. Dmitri begs for Katerina to visit him in the hospital, where he is recovering from an illness, before he is due to be taken away. When she does, Dmitri apologizes for having hurt her; she in turn apologizes for bringing up the implicating letter during the trial. They agree to love each other for that one moment, and say they will love each other forever, even though both now love other people. The novel concludes at Ilyusha's funeral, where Ilyusha's schoolboy friends listen to Alyosha's "Speech by the Stone". Alyosha promises to remember Kolya, Ilyusha, and all the boys and keep them close in his heart, even though he will have to leave them and may not see them again until many years have passed. He implores them to love each other and to always remember Ilyusha, and to keep his memory alive in their hearts, and to remember this moment at the stone when they were all together and they all loved each other. Alyosha then recounts the Christian promise that they will all be united one day after the Resurrection. In tears, the twelve boys promise Alyosha that they will keep each other in their memories forever. They join hands, and return to the Snegiryov household for the funeral dinner, chanting "Hurrah for Karamazov!"

Themes

Faith and atheism

One of the novel's central themes is the counterposition of the true spiritual meaning of the Orthodox Christian faith, particularly insofar as it is posited as the heart of Russian national identity and history, with the ideas and values emanating from the new doctrines of atheism, rationalism, socialism and nihilism. Not only were these ideas and values alien to Russia's spiritual heritage, they were, in Dostoevsky's opinion, actively working to destroy it, and moreover were becoming increasingly popular and influential, especially among Russia's youth.[15] The theme had already been vividly depicted in all the earlier major novels, particularly Demons, but in The Brothers Karamazov Dostoevsky artistically represents and counterposes the two antithetical worldviews in archetypal forms — the character of Ivan Fyodorovich and his legend of The Grand Inquisitor, and the characters of Alyosha and the Elder Zosima in their expression and embodiment of a lived Christian faith.

The character of Ivan Fyodorovich, though he outwardly plays the role of devil's advocate, is inwardly far from being resolved in his atheism. A constantly reappearing motif in the novel is his proposition that without faith in immortality, there is no such thing as virtue, and that if there is no God, everything is permitted. When Zosima encounters the idea in the meeting at the monastery, he doesn't dispute it, but suggests to Ivan that since in all probability he doesn't believe in the immortality of his own soul, his thoughts must be a source of torment to him: "But the martyr likes sometimes to divert himself with his despair, as it were driven to it by despair itself. Meanwhile ... you divert yourself with magazine articles, and discussions in society, though you don't believe your own arguments, and with an aching heart mock at them inwardly.... That question you have not answered, and it is your great grief, for it clamors for an answer."[16] In his relations with Ivan, Alyosha consciously personifies the loving voice of faith that he knows lives in his brother's soul, in opposition to the mocking voice of doubt that ultimately becomes personified in the nightmare of the Devil.[17] Alyosha says of Ivan "His mind is a prisoner of his soul. There is a great and unresolved thought in him. He is one of those who don't need millions, they just need to get a thought straight."[18]

Dostoevsky wrote to his editor that his intention with book V, "Pro and Contra", was to portray "the seed of the idea of destruction in our time in Russia among the young people uprooted from reality". This seed is depicted as: "the rejection not of God but of the meaning of His creation. Socialism has sprung from the denial of the meaning of historical reality and ended in a program of destruction and anarchism."[19] In the chapter "Rebellion", the rationale behind Ivan's rejection of God's world is expounded in a long dialogue with Alyosha, in which he justifies his atheism on the grounds of the very principle—universal love and compassion—that is at the heart of the Christian faith. The unmitigated evil in the world, particularly as it relates to the suffering of children, is not something that can be accepted by a heart steeped in love, so Ivan feels bound in his conscience to "humbly return the ticket" to God. The idea of the refusal of love on the grounds of love is taken further in the subsequent "Legend of the Grand Inquisitor". In a long dialogue, in which the second participant (the returned Christ) remains silent for its entire duration, the Inquisitor rejects the freedom and spiritual beauty of Christ's teaching as being beyond the capability of earthly humanity, and affirms instead the bread-and-chains materialism derived from the Devil's Temptations as being the only realistic and truly compassionate basis for the government of men.[20] The Legend is Ivan's confession of the struggle of "pro and contra" taking place within his own soul in relation to the problem of faith. According to Mikhail Bakhtin, "both the very form of its construction as The Grand Inquisitor's dialogue with Christ and at the same time with himself, and the very unexpectedness and duality of its finale, indicate an internally dialogic disintegration at its ideological core."[21]

With Book VI, "The Russian Monk", Dostoevsky sought to provide the refutation of Ivan's negation of God, through the teachings of the dying Elder, Zosima.[22] The dark world of the Inquisitor's reasoning is juxtaposed with the radiant, idyllically stylized communications of the dying Elder and Alyosha's renderings of his life and teachings.[23][24] Zosima, though suffering and near death, unreservedly communicates his love for those around him, and recounts the stories of the crucial moments in his progress along the spiritual path. Alyosha records these accounts for posterity, as well as the Elder's teachings and discourses on various subjects, including: the significance of the Russian Monk; spiritual brotherhood between masters and servants; the impossibility of judging one's fellow creatures; Faith, Prayer, Love, and Contiguity with Other Worlds; and the spiritual meaning of 'hell' as the suffering of being unable to Love. Dostoevsky based Zosima's teachings on those of the 18th century Orthodox saint and spiritual writer Tikhon of Zadonsk, and constructed them around his own formulation of the essence of a true Christian faith: that all are responsible for all, and that "everyone is guilty before all and for everything, and therefore everyone is strong enough also to forgive everything for others". He was acutely aware of the difficulty of the artistic task he had set himself and of the incompatibility of the form and content of his "reply" with ordinary discourse and the everyday concerns of his contemporaries.[25]

Freedom and mechanistic psychology

"Dostoevsky could hear dialogic relationships everywhere, in all manifestations of conscious and intelligent human life. Where consciousness began, there dialogue began also. Only purely mechanistic relationships are not dialogic, and Dostoevsky categorically denied their importance for understanding and interpreting life and the acts of man."[26]

Throughout the novel, in the very nature of all the characters and their interactions, the freedom of the human personality is affirmed, in opposition to any form of deterministic reduction. The "physiologism" that is being attacked is identified in the repeated references to Claude Bernard, who becomes for Dmitri a despised symbol of the scientific reduction of the human soul to impersonal physiological processes. For Dmitri the word 'Bernard' becomes the most contemptuous of insults. References to Bernard are in part a response to Zola's theories about heredity and environment, gleaned from Bernard's ideas, which functioned as the ideological background to the Les Rougon-Macquart series of novels.[27]

Though the affirmation of freedom and rejection of mechanistic psychology is most openly and forcefully expressed through the character of Dmitri, as a theme it pervades the entire novel and virtually all of Dostoevsky's other writings. Bakhtin discusses it in terms of what he calls the unfinalizability of Dostoevsky's characters. In Dostoevsky, a fundamental refusal to be wholly defined by an external source (another person, a social interpretation, an ideology, a system of 'knowledge', or anything at all that places a finalizing limit on the primordial freedom of the living soul, including even death) is at the heart of the character. He sees this quality as essential to the human being, to being human, and in his most fiercely independent characters, such as Ivan and Dmitri in The Brothers Karamazov, Raskolnikov in Crime and Punishment, Nastasya Filippovna and Ippolit in The Idiot, or the Underground man in Notes From Underground, it is actively expressed in virtually all their words and deeds.[28] According to Bakhtin, for Dostoevsky:

A man never coincides with himself. One cannot apply the formula of identity A≡A. In Dostoevsky's artistic thinking the genuine life of the personality takes place at the point of non-coincidence between a man and himself, at his point of departure beyond the limits of all that he is as a material being – a being that can be spied on, defined, predicted apart from its own will, "at second hand". The genuine life of the personality is made available only through a dialogic penetration of that personality, during which it freely and reciprocally reveals itself.

Style

Although written in the 19th century, The Brothers Karamazov displays a number of modern elements. Dostoevsky composed the book with a variety of literary techniques. Though privy to many of the thoughts and feelings of the protagonists, the narrator is a self-proclaimed writer; he discusses his own mannerisms and personal perceptions so often in the novel that he becomes a character. Through his descriptions, the narrator's voice merges imperceptibly into the tone of the people he is describing, often extending into the characters' most personal thoughts. There is no voice of authority in the story.[i] In addition to the principal narrator, there are several sections narrated by other characters entirely, such as the story of The Grand Inquisitor and Zosima's confessions.

Dostoevsky uses individual styles of speech to express the inner personality of each person. For example, the attorney Fetyukovich (based on Vladimir Spasovich) is characterized by malapropisms (e.g. 'robbed' for 'stolen', and at one point declares possible suspects in the murder 'irresponsible' rather than innocent).[citation needed] Several plot digressions provide insight into other apparently minor characters. For example, the narrative in Book Six is almost entirely devoted to Zosima's biography, which contains a confession from a man whom he met many years before. Dostoevsky does not rely on a single source or a group of major characters to convey the themes of this book, but uses a variety of viewpoints, narratives and characters throughout.

Reception and influence

The Brothers Karamazov has had a deep influence on many public figures over the years for widely varying reasons. Admirers include scientists such as Albert Einstein,[29] philosophers Ludwig Wittgenstein[30] and Martin Heidegger,[31] as well as writers such as Virginia Woolf,[32] Cormac McCarthy,[33] Haruki Murakami,[34] and Frederick Buechner.[35]

British writer C. P. Snow writes of Einstein's admiration for the novel: "The Brothers Karamazov—that for him in 1919 was the supreme summit of all literature. It remained so when I talked to him in 1937, and probably until the end of his life."[36]

Sigmund Freud called it "the most magnificent novel ever written" and was fascinated with what he saw as its Oedipal themes. In 1928 Freud published a paper titled "Dostoevsky and Parricide" in which he investigated Dostoevsky's own neuroses.[37] Freud claimed that Dostoevsky's epilepsy was not a natural condition but instead a physical manifestation of the author's hidden guilt over his own father's death. According to Freud, Dostoevsky (and all other sons) wished for the death of his father because of latent desire for his mother; citing the fact that Dostoevsky's epileptic fits began at age 18, the year his father died. It followed that more obvious themes of patricide and guilt, especially in the form of the moral guilt illustrated by Ivan Karamazov, were further literary evidence of his theory.

Franz Kafka felt indebted to Dostoevsky and The Brothers Karamazov, calling himself and Dostoevsky "blood relatives" and was immensely interested in the hatred the brothers demonstrated toward their father in the novel. He probably found parallels with his own strained father-son relationship and drew on this theme to some extent in his works, especially the short story "The Judgment").[38]

James Joyce wrote:

[Leo] Tolstoy admired him but he thought that he had little artistic accomplishment or mind. Yet, as he said, 'he admired his heart', a criticism which contains a great deal of truth, for though his characters do act extravagantly, madly, almost, still their basis is firm enough underneath.... The Brothers Karamazov ... made a deep impression on me ... he created some unforgettable scenes [detail].... Madness you may call it, but therein may be the secret of his genius.... I prefer the word exaltation, exaltation which can merge into madness, perhaps. In fact all great men have had that vein in them; it was the source of their greatness; the reasonable man achieves nothing.[39][page needed]

Not all reception to the book was positive. Some were critical of it, such as Henry James, Vladimir Nabokov, D. H. Lawrence, and Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky.[40] Tchaikovsky, for instance, once said of the novel in a letter that "Dostoyevsky is a writer of genius, but an antipathetic one."[41]

As for Leo Tolstoy himself, the work appears to have proved both challenging and provocative. Entries from his journal indicate that, like others, he considered Dostoevsky's idiosyncratic style to be an obstacle, yet the book was one of several that he requested accompany him on his deathbed.[42]

The philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein is said to have read The Brothers Karamazov "so often he knew whole passages of it by heart".[43] A copy of the novel was one of the few possessions Wittgenstein brought with him to the front during World War I.[43]

Martin Heidegger identified Dostoevsky's thought as one of the most important sources for his early and best known book, Being and Time.[44] Of the two portraits Heidegger kept on the wall of his office, one was of Dostoevsky.[45][page needed]

According to philosopher Charles B. Guignon, the novel's most fascinating character, Ivan Karamazov, had by the middle of the twentieth century become the icon of existentialist rebellion in the writings of existentialist philosophers Albert Camus and Jean-Paul Sartre.[45][page needed] Camus centered on a discussion of Ivan Karamazov's revolt in his 1951 book Rebel. Ivan's poem "The Grand Inquisitor" is arguably one of the best-known passages in modern literature due to its ideas about human nature, freedom, power, authority, and religion, as well as for its fundamental ambiguity.[45][page needed] A reference to the poem can be found in English novelist Aldous Huxley's Brave New World Revisited and American writer David Foster Wallace's novel Infinite Jest.

Nobel Prize laureate William Faulkner reread the book regularly, claiming it as his greatest literary inspiration next to Shakespeare's works and the Bible. He once wrote that American literature had yet to produce anything great enough to compare with Dostoyevsky's novel.[32]

In an essay on The Brothers Karamazov, written after the Russian Revolution and the First World War, Nobel Prize-winning author Hermann Hesse described Dostoevsky as not a "poet" but a "prophet".[46] British writer W. Somerset Maugham included the book in his list of ten greatest novels in the world.[47]

Contemporary Turkish Nobel Prize-winning writer Orhan Pamuk said during a lecture in St. Petersburg that the first time he read The Brothers Karamazov, his life was changed. He felt Dostoyevsky, through his storytelling, revealed completely unique insight into life and human nature.[32]

American philosophical novelist Walker Percy said in an interview:[48]

I suppose my model is nearly always Dostoevsky, who was a man of very strong convictions, but his characters illustrated and incarnated the most powerful themes and issues and trends of his day. I think maybe the greatest novel of all time is The Brothers Karamazov which...almost prophesies and prefigures everything—all the bloody mess and the issues of the 20th century.

Pope Benedict XVI cited the book in the 2007 encyclical Spe Salvi.[49]

Soviet leader Joseph Stalin had read Dostoevsky since his youth and considered the author as a great psychologist. His copy of The Brothers Karamazov reveals extensive highlights and notes in the margins that he made while reading the work, which have been studied and analyzed by multiple researchers.[50][51]

According to Serbian state news agency Tanjug, Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić described Dostoevsky as his best-loved novelist, saying: "The Brothers Karamazov may be the best work of world literature."[52] American First Lady Laura Bush has said she is an admirer of the novel.[53]

Translations

Although The Brothers Karamazov has been translated from the original Russian into a number of languages, the novel's diverse array of distinct voices and literary techniques makes its translation difficult. Constance Garnett published a translation in 1912, which Garth Terry called "the first adequate English translation".[54] An earlier version (by Isabel Florence Hapgood) was published in 1905.

In 1958, David Magarshack and Manuel Komroff released translations of the novel, published respectively by Penguin and The New American Library of World Literature.[55] In 1976, Ralph Matlaw thoroughly revised Garnett's work for his Norton Critical Edition volume.[56] This in turn was the basis for Victor Terras' influential A Karamazov Companion.[57] Another translation is by Julius Katzer, published by Progress Publishers in 1981 and later re-printed by Raduga Publishers Moscow.

In 1990 Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky released a new translation; it won a PEN/Book-of-the-Month Club Translation Prize in 1991 and garnered positive reviews from The New York Times Book Review and the Dostoevsky scholar Joseph Frank, who praised it for being the most faithful to Dostoevsky's original Russian.[58]

Peter France

In The Oxford Guide to Literature in English Translations, academic Peter France comments on several translations of Dostoevsky's work. In regard to Constance Garnett's translations, he writes:[59]

[Her] translations read easily...the basic meaning of the Russian text is accurately rendered on the whole. It is true, as critics such as Nikoliukin have demonstrated, that she shortens and simplifies, muting Dostoevsky's jarring contrasts, sacrificing his insistent rhythms and repetitions, toning down the Russian colouring, explaining and normalizing in all kinds of ways...Garnett shortens some of Dostoevsky's idiosyncrasy in order to produce an acceptable English text, but her versions were in many cases pioneering versions; decorous they may be, but they allowed this strange new voice to invade English literature and thus made it possible for later translators to go further in the search for more authentic voice.

On David Magarshack's Dostoevsky translations, France says:[60]

[I]t is not certain that Magarshack has worn as well as Garnett. He certainly corrects some of her errors; he also aims for a more up-to-date style which flows more easily in English...Being even more thoroughly englished than Garnett's, Magarshack's translations lack some of the excitement of the foreign.

On Andrew R. MacAndrew's American version, he comments: "He translates fairly freely, altering details, rearranging, shortening and explaining the Russian to produce texts which lack a distinctive voice."[60]

On David McDuff's Penguin translation:[61]

McDuff carries this literalism the furthest of any of the translators. In his Brothers Karamazov the odd, fussy tone of the narrator is well rendered in the preface...At times, indeed, the convoluted style might make the reader unfamiliar with Dostoevsky's Russian question the translator's command of English. More seriously, this literalism means that the dialogue is sometimes impossibly odd—and as a result rather dead...Such 'foreignizing' fidelity makes for difficult reading.

On the Pevear and Volokhonsky's translation, France writes:[62]

Pevear and Volokhonsky, while they too stress the need to exhume the real, rough-edged Dostoevsky from the normalization practised by earlier translators, generally offer a rather more satisfactory compromise between the literal and the readable. In particular, their rendering of dialogue is often livelier and more colloquial than McDuff's...Elsewhere, it has to be said, the desire to replicate the vocabulary or syntax of the Russian results in unnecessary awkwardness and obscurity.[63]

In commenting on Ignat Avsey's translation, he writes: "His not entirely unprecedented choice of a more natural-sounding English formulation is symptomatic of his general desire to make his text English...His is an enjoyable version in the domesticating tradition."[62]

List of English translations

This is a list of all unabridged and one abridged English translations of the novel:[64][65]

Constance Garnett (1912)
revised by Avrahm Yarmolinsky (1933)
revised by Alexandra Kropotkin and abridged by W. Somerset Maugham (1949)
revised by Manuel Komroff (1958)
revised by Ralph E. Matlaw (1976)
revised by Ralph E. Matlaw and Susan McReynolds Oddo (2011)
David Magarshack (1958)
Andrew R. MacAndrew (1970)
Julius Katzer (1980, as The Karamazov Brothers)
Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky (1990)
David McDuff (1993)
Ignat Avsey (1994, as The Karamazov Brothers)
Michael R. Katz (2023)

revised by Avrahm Yarmolinsky (1933)
revised by Alexandra Kropotkin and abridged by W. Somerset Maugham (1949)
revised by Manuel Komroff (1958)
revised by Ralph E. Matlaw (1976)
revised by Ralph E. Matlaw and Susan McReynolds Oddo (2011)

Adaptations

Film

There have been several film adaptations of The Brothers Karamazov, including:

The Brothers Karamazov (1915 silent film, lost, directed by Victor Tourjansky)[66]
Die Brüder Karamasoff (1921, directed by Carl Froelich, in German)[67]
Der Mörder Dimitri Karamasoff (1931, directed by Erich Engels & Fyodor Otsep, in German)[68]
I fratelli Karamazoff (1947, directed by Giacomo Gentilomo, in Italian)[69]
The Brothers Karamazov (1958, directed by Richard Brooks)
The Brothers Karamazov (1969, directed by Kirill Lavrov, Ivan Pyryev and Mikhail Ulyanov)
The Brothers Karamazov (1969, directed by Marcel Bluwal)

Television

A Russian 12-episode series was produced in 2009 and is considered to be as close to the book as possible.[70] It aired on Channel One.

The 2013 Japanese TV drama Karamazov no Kyōdai is an adaptation of the book set in modern-day Japan.

The Open University produced a version of "The Grand Inquisitor" in 1975 starring John Gielgud.[71]

"The Grand Inquisitor" was adapted for British television as a one-hour drama titled Inquisition. Starring Derek Jacobi as the inquisitor, it was first broadcast on Channel 5 on 22 December 2002.

A 30-episode drama series named Oulad El Moukhtar ('Mokhtar's Sons') was produced by Nabil Ayouch for Al Aoula in 2020. The adaptation of the book is set in Morocco, with some aspects changed to resemble the local Moroccan culture.[72]

Unfinished sequel

A sequel to The Brothers Karamazov that would detail the life of Alexey Karamazov beyond the ending of what was supposed to be the first novel had been planned out by Dostoevsky, but was left unfinished due to the author's death in 1881.[73]

Explanatory notes

^ See Bakhtin (1984) for more on the relationship between Dostoevsky and his characters.

References

Citations

^ "The Brothers Karamazov and the Faith of Fyodor Dostoevsky". By Faith. Retrieved 3 June 2024.

^ Piretto, Gian Piero (1986). "Staraia Russa and Petersburg; Provincial Realities and Metropolitan Reminiscences in The Brothers Karamazov". Dostoevsky Studies. 7. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013.

^ Lantz (2004), pp. 240–2.

^ Complete Works, vol. 17, p. 427.

^ Complete Works, vol. 17, p. 430.

^ Lantz (2004), pp. 40–1.

^ Frank, Joseph (2003) [2002]. Dostoevsky: The Mantle of the Prophet, 1871–1881. Princeton University Press. pp. 383–4. ISBN 978-0-691-11569-6.

^ Figes, Orlando (2002). Natasha's Dance, A Cultural History of Russia. New York City: Picador. p. 325. ISBN 9780312421953.

^ Frank (2010), p. 204.

^ a b Frank (2010), p. 788

^ Frank (2010), p. 789.

^ Frank (2010), pp. 736–7.

^ Letters 102-103; August 7/19, 1879, quoted in Frank (2010), p. 797.

^ Quoted in Frank (2010), p. 798.

^ Frank (2010), pp. 788–90, 797–800.

^ The Brothers Karamazov, Book II, Chapter 6.

^ Bakhtin (1984), p. 86.

^ The Brothers Karamazov, Book II, Chapter 7

^ Letter of May 10, 1879, quoted in Frank (2010), p. 788.

^ Frank (2010), pp. 788–94.

^ Bakhtin (1984), p. 279.

^ Letter of May 10, 1879, quoted in Frank (2010), p. 788

^ Frank (2010), pp. 797–800.

^ Bakhtin (1984), pp. 248–9.

^ Frank (2010), p. 800.

^ Bakhtin (1984), p. 40.

^ Frank (2010), p. 779.

^ Bakhtin (1984), pp. 59–60.

^ Einstein, Albert (2004). Diana K. Buchwald; Robert Schulmann; József Illy; Daniel Kennefick; Tilman Sauer (eds.). The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Volume 9: The Berlin Years: Correspondence, January 1919-April 1920. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691120881.

^ Malcolm, Norman; Von Wright, G.H.; Wittgenstein, Ludwig (2001). Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir. Oxford University Press. p. 45. ISBN 0-19-924759-5.

^ Schalow, Frank (31 October 2001). Heidegger and the Quest for the Sacred: From Thought to the Sanctuary of Faith. Springer. p. 23. ISBN 978-1-4020-0036-2.

^ a b c Guzeva, Alexandra (2 May 2018). "5 Western writers influenced by Fyodor Dostoyevsky". Russia beyond. Retrieved 20 April 2019.

^ Hage, Erik (16 March 2010). Cormac Mccarthy: A Literary Companion. McFarland. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-7864-5559-1.

^ Anderson, Sam (21 October 2011). "The Fierce Imagination of Haruki Murakami". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 24 August 2016.

^ Brown, W. Dale (1997). Of fiction and faith : twelve American writers talk about their vision and work. Grand Rapids MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 50. ISBN 0802843131. OCLC 36994237.

^ Moszkowski, Alexander (1972). Conversations with Einstein. London: Sidgwick and Jackson. p. vii. ISBN 0283979240.

^ Freud, S. (1 January 1945). "Dostoevsky and parricide". The International Journal of Psycho-Analysis. 26: 1–8. ISSN 0020-7578. PMID 21006519.

^ Roman S. Struc (1981). "Kafka and Dostoevsky as Blood Relatives". University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 4 October 2012. Retrieved 24 October 2023.

^ Power, Arthur (1974). Clive Hart (ed.). Conversations with James Joyce. Usborne Publishin. ISBN 9780860000068.

^ Miller, Robin Feuer (2008). "Chapter 3. Critical Reception". The Brothers Karamazov: Worlds of the Novel. Yale University Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-300-12562-7.

^ Tchaikovsky, Pyotr Ilyich. "Letter 1838". Tchaikovsky Research. Retrieved 17 April 2024.

^ "What Was on Tolstoy's Bookshelf?". Oprah. Retrieved 28 July 2024.

^ a b Monk, Ray (1991). Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius. Penguin Books. p. 136. ISBN 9780140159950.

^ "Heidegger, Martin: Frühe Schriften – Vittorio Klostermann – Philosophie, Recht, Literatur, Bibliothek". klostermann.de. Retrieved 24 August 2016.

^ a b c Dostoyevsky, Fyodor (1993). Guignon, Charles B. (ed.). The Grand Inquisitor: With Related Chapters from The Brothers Karamazov. Translated by Constance Garnett. Introduction by Charles B. Guignon. Hackett. ISBN 0872201937.

^ Connolly, Julian W. (2013). Dostoevsky's The Brothers Karamazov. A&C Black. p. 121. ISBN 978-1623560508.

^ Maugham, W. Somerset (2010). Ten Novels And Their Authors. Random House. Chapter 10. ISBN 9781409058427.

^ Desmond, John F. (Spring 2012). "Fyodor Dostoevsky, Walker Percy and the Demonic Self". The Southern Literary Journal. 44 (2): 88–107. doi:10.1353/slj.2012.0005. S2CID 159696221.

^ Spe salvi, section 44, 2007: "Grace does not cancel out justice. It does not make wrong into right. It is not a sponge which wipes everything away, so that whatever someone has done on earth ends up being of equal value. Dostoevsky, for example, was right to protest against this kind of Heaven and this kind of grace in his novel The Brothers Karamazov. Evildoers, in the end, do not sit at table at the eternal banquet beside their victims without distinction, as though nothing had happened.", cited in God and the Devil are Fighting: The Scandal of Evil in Dostoyevsky and Camus, by Stephen M. O'Brien.

^ Kostova, Raina; Brinkley, Tony (7 June 2011). "Stalin's Brothers Karamazov". Hungarian Review. II (4). Retrieved 24 August 2016.

^ Brinkley, Tony; Kostova, Raina (1 January 2006). "Dialogic Imaginings: Stalin's Re-Reading in the 1930s of the Brothers Karamazov". The Dostoevsky Journal. 7 (1): 55–74. doi:10.1163/23752122-00701003. ISSN 2375-2122.

^ "Vucic: SAD vec imaju bazu u Srbiji". Politika (in Serbo-Croatian). 7 July 2017.

^ Zenilman, Avi (16 October 2009). "The Former First Lady As A Literary Device". The New Yorker. Retrieved 24 August 2016.

^ Jones & Terry (1983), p. 216.

^ Manuel Komroff, The Brothers Karamazov.  New York, 1957.

^ Ralph E. Matlaw, The Brothers Karamazov. New York: W.W. Norton, 1976, 1981

^ Terras [1981].

^ David Remnick (7 November 2005). "The Translation Wars". The New Yorker. Retrieved 23 April 2008.

^ France (2000), pp. 595–6.

^ a b France (2000), p. 596.

^ France (2000), pp. 596–7.

^ a b France (2000), p. 597.

^ Soar, Daniel (6 March 2025). "Will I, Won't I? Dostoyevsky's Kiss". London Review of Books. Vol. 47, no. 4. In this essay comparing English translations of Brothers Karamazov, Daniel Soar notes: "Pevear and Volokhonsky's version...is the closest to getting across the oddness of the writing. In his introduction, Pevear explains that he and his wife tried to replicate the narrator's redundancies and tautologies."

^ Burnett, Leon (2000). "Dostoevskii". Encyclopedia of Literary Translation into English: A–L, edited by O. Classe. Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers. pp. 366–67.

^ France (2000), p. 598.

^ "Silent Era : Progressive Silent Film List". silentera.com.

^ "Die Brüder Karamasoff (1921)". IMDb. 20 July 1921.

^ "Der Mörder Dimitri Karamasoff (1931)". IMDb. 24 November 1931.

^ "I fratelli Karamazoff (1947)". IMDb. 4 December 1947.

^ "Bratya Karamazovy / The Brothers Karamazov [2 DVD NTSC][English Subtitles][2009]". Amazon (in Russian). Retrieved 21 January 2014.

^ John Gielgud (inquisitor), Michael Feast (prisoner), Richard Argent (producer) (1975). The Grand Inquisitor. Open University.

^ "Abdallah Lahfari campe Salah dans 'Oulad Mokhtar'" (in French). L'Opinion. 4 March 2020. Retrieved 2 July 2020.

^ Rice, James L. (13 May 2024). "Dostoevsky's Endgame: The Projected Sequel to "The Brothers Karamazov"". Russian History. 33 (1): 45–62. doi:10.1163/187633106X00032. JSTOR 24663296.

General bibliography

Institute of Russian Literature (The Pushkin House) (ed.). Complete Works in Thirty Volumes (полное собрание сочинений в тридцати томах) (in Russian). Nauka.
Bakhtin, Mikhail (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky's Poetics. Translated by Caryl Emerson. University Of Minnesota Press. ISBN 9780816612277.
France, Peter (2000). "Dostoevsky". In Peter France (ed.). The Oxford Guide to Literature in English Translation. Oxford University Press.
Frank, Joseph (2010). Dostoevsky A Writer in his Time. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691128191.
Lantz, Kenneth A. (2004). The Dostoevsky Encyclopedia. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-30384-5.
Jones, Malcolm V.; Terry, Garth M. (1983). New Essays on Dostoyevsky. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-15531-1.
Mochulsky, Konstantin (1967) [1967]. Dostoevsky: His Life and Work. Minihan, Michael A. (translator). Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-01299-7.
Terras, Victor (2002) [1981]. A Karamazov Companion. University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 0-299-08310-1.

External links

The Brothers Karamazov at Standard Ebooks

 The Brothers Karamazov at Project Gutenberg
 The Brothers Karamazov public domain audiobook at LibriVox
Original Russian text at grammatical analyser
Full text in the original Russian

vte

Alyosha Karamazov
Fyodor Karamazov
Ivan Karamazov
Pavel Fyodorovich Smerdyakov

The Brothers Karamazov (1958)
The Brothers Karamazov (1969)
The Karamazov Brothers (2008)

The Grand Inquisitor

vte

Bibliography
Letters
Themes

Poor Folk (1846)
The Double (1846)
Netochka Nezvanova (1849)
The Village of Stepanchikovo (1859)
Humiliated and Insulted (1861)
The House of the Dead (1862)
Crime and Punishment (1866)
The Gambler (1867)
The Idiot (1869)
The Eternal Husband (1870)
Demons (1872)
The Adolescent (1875)
The Brothers Karamazov (1880)

The Landlady (1847)
Uncle's Dream (1859)
Notes from Underground (1864)

"Mr. Prokharchin" (1846)
"Another Man's Wife and a Husband Under the Bed" (1848)
"The Honest Thief" (1848)
"The Christmas Tree and a Wedding" (1848)
"White Nights" (1848)
"A Nasty Anecdote" (1862)
"The Crocodile" (1865)
"Bobok" (1873)
"The Beggar Boy at Christ's Christmas Tree" (1876)
"The Meek One" (1876)
"The Peasant Marey" (1876)
"The Dream of a Ridiculous Man" (1877)

"Winter Notes on Summer Impressions" (1863)
A Writer's Diary (1873–1881)

Nastasya Filipovna
Alyosha Karamazov
Fyodor Karamazov
Prince Myshkin
Rodion Raskolnikov

Anna Dostoevskaya (second wife)
Lyubov Dostoevskaya (daughter)
Mikhail Dostoevsky (brother)
Polina Suslova (mistress)
Dostoevsky Museum
"The Grand Inquisitor"
Pushkin Speech
Vremya magazine
Epoch magazine
Twenty Six Days from the Life of Dostoyevsky (1981 film)

VIAF

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataAustraliaSpainCroatiaGreeceSwedenPolandIsrael

IdRef

Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus is an 1818 Gothic novel written by English author Mary Shelley. Frankenstein tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, a young scientist who creates a sapient creature in an unorthodox scientific experiment. Shelley started writing the story when she was 18, and the first edition was published anonymously in London on 1 January 1818, when she was 20. Her name first appeared in the second edition, which was published in Paris in 1821.

Shelley travelled through Europe in 1815, moving along the river Rhine in Germany, and stopping in Gernsheim, 17 kilometres (11 mi) away from Frankenstein Castle, where, about a century earlier, Johann Konrad Dippel, an alchemist, had engaged in experiments.[2][3][4] She then journeyed to the region of Geneva, Switzerland, where much of the story takes place. Galvanism and occult ideas were topics of conversation for her companions, particularly for her lover and future husband Percy Bysshe Shelley.

In 1816, Mary, Percy, John Polidori, and Lord Byron had a competition to see who would write the best horror story.[5] 
After thinking for days, Shelley was inspired to write Frankenstein after imagining a scientist who created life and was horrified by what he had made.[6]

Frankenstein is one of the best-known works of English literature. Infused with elements of the Gothic novel and the Romantic movement, it has had a considerable influence on literature and on popular culture, spawning a complete genre of horror stories, films, and plays. Since the publication of the novel, the name Frankenstein has often been used to refer to the monster.[7][8][9]

Plot summary

Victor Frankenstein, son of an upper-class Genevese family, spends his youth obsessed with alchemy. As he grows older, he develops an interest in modern sciences such as chemistry and electricity. After his mother Caroline dies of scarlet fever, Victor leaves home to attend the University of Ingolstadt. Through his studies, Victor discovers a new way to create life, which he uses to create a large and grotesque humanoid creature. When the creature awakens, Victor flees in terror. He returns to find the creature gone.

The newly conscious creature runs away, discovers fire, and learns to avoid humans, who find him frightening. He finds a hovel attached to a small house, which lets him observe a family while remaining unseen. As the family teaches their language to a foreigner, the creature also learns to speak and write. He also finds a collection of books, including Paradise Lost, and learns to read. When he finally reveals himself to the family, they are horrified by his appearance and chase him away. The creature then saves a young girl from drowning, only to be shot by her father, who perceives his rescue as an attack.

Angry at humanity, the creature returns to Geneva to find Victor, and instead meets Victor's brother William. Realizing that William belongs to the same family, the creature kills him, then frames the Frankensteins' servant Justine for his death. Victor suspects his creature was responsible, but does not intervene while Justine is tried and executed. Later, while hiking on Mer de Glace, Victor encounters the creature again. The creature relays his story and asks Victor to create a female companion, which he believes will be his only chance at happiness. Victor agrees.

"Oh, Frankenstein, be not equitable to every other, and trample upon me alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy clemency and affection, is most due. Remember, that I am thy creature; I ought to be thy Adam; but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss, from which I alone am irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent and good; misery made me a fiend. Make me happy, and I shall again be virtuous."

— The Creature asks Victor Frankenstein to create a female companion.

Victor and his friend Henry leave the European mainland for Britain, where Victor establishes a laboratory in Orkney. While working on the female creature, Victor worries about his creations giving birth, and decides to destroy the incomplete female instead. In retaliation, the original creature murders Henry. Victor suffers a mental breakdown, then returns home. Back in Geneva, Victor marries his childhood friend Elizabeth Lavenza, only for the creature to murder her on the wedding night. Days later, Victor's father Alphonse dies of grief. With no remaining family, Victor vows revenge and pursues the creature, eventually following him to the Arctic.

Chasing the creature across Arctic ice, Victor nearly dies from exhaustion and hypothermia. He is rescued by Captain Robert Walton, who leads an expedition to the North Pole. Victor recounts his story to Walton and encourages the crew to continue their expedition; instead, they decide to abandon their journey and turn back. Victor vows to continue chasing the creature, but in his weakened state he dies aboard the ship. As the ship leaves the Arctic, the creature comes onboard. He mourns Victor's death, tells Walton he plans to burn himself on a pyre, then departs.

Author's background

Mary Shelley's mother, Mary Wollstonecraft, died from infection eleven days after giving birth to her. Shelley grew close to her father, William Godwin, having never known her mother. Godwin hired a nurse, who briefly cared for her and her half sister, before marrying his second wife Mary Jane Clairmont, who did not like the close bond between Shelley and her father. The resulting friction caused Godwin to favour his other children.

Shelley's father was a famous author of the time, and her education was of great importance to him, although it was not formal. Shelley grew up surrounded by her father's friends, writers, and persons of political importance, who often gathered at the family home. This inspired her authorship at an early age. Mary, at the age of sixteen, met Percy Bysshe Shelley (who later became her husband) while he was visiting her father. Godwin did not approve of the relationship between his daughter and an older, married man, so they fled to France along with her stepsister, Claire Clairmont. On 22 February 1815, Shelley gave birth prematurely to her first child, Clara, who died two weeks later.[10]

In the summer of 1816, Mary, Percy, and Claire took a trip to visit Claire's lover, Lord Byron, in Geneva. Poor weather conditions, more akin to winter, forced Byron and the visitors to stay indoors. To help pass time, Byron suggested that he, Mary, Percy, and Byron's physician, John Polidori, have a competition to write the best ghost story to pass time stuck indoors.[11]  Mary was just eighteen years old when she won the contest with her creation of Frankenstein.[12][13]

Literary influences

Shelley's work was heavily influenced by that of her parents. Her father was famous for Enquiry Concerning Political Justice and her mother famous for A Vindication of the Rights of Woman. Her father's novels also influenced her writing of Frankenstein. These novels included Things as They Are; or, The Adventures of Caleb Williams, St. Leon, and Fleetwood. All of these books were set in Switzerland, similar to the setting in Frankenstein. Some major themes of social affections and the renewal of life that appear in Shelley's novel stem from these works she had in her possession. Other literary influences that appear in Frankenstein are Pygmalion et Galatée by Mme de Genlis, and Ovid, with the use of individuals identifying the problems with society.[14] Ovid also inspires the use of Prometheus in Shelley's title.[15]

The influence of John Milton's Paradise Lost and Samuel Taylor Coleridge's The Rime of the Ancient Mariner are evident in the novel. In The Frankenstein of the French Revolution, author Julia Douthwaite posits that Shelley probably acquired some ideas for Frankenstein's character from Humphry Davy's book Elements of Chemical Philosophy, in which he had written that,

science has ... bestowed upon man powers which may be called creative; which have enabled him to change and modify the beings around him ...

References to the French Revolution run through the novel; a likely source is François-Félix Nogaret [fr]'s Le Miroir des événemens actuels, ou la Belle au plus offrant (1790), a political parable about scientific progress featuring an inventor named Frankésteïn, who creates a life-sized automaton.[16]

Both Frankenstein and the monster quote passages from Percy Shelley's 1816 poem, "Mutability", and its theme of the role of the subconscious is discussed in prose. Percy Shelley's name never appeared as the author of the poem, although the novel credits other quoted poets by name. Samuel Taylor Coleridge's poem "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" (1798) is associated with the theme of guilt and William Wordsworth's "Tintern Abbey" (1798) with that of innocence.

Many writers and historians have attempted to associate several then-popular natural philosophers (now called physical scientists) with Shelley's work because of several notable similarities. Two of the most noted natural philosophers among Shelley's contemporaries were Giovanni Aldini, who made many public attempts at human reanimation through bio-electric Galvanism in London,[17] and Johann Konrad Dippel, who was supposed to have developed chemical means to extend the life span of humans. While Shelley was aware of both of these men and their activities, she makes no mention of or reference to them or their experiments in any of her published or released notes.

Ideas about life and death discussed by Percy and Byron were of great interest to scientists of that time. They discussed ideas from Erasmus Darwin and the experiments of Luigi Galvani as well as James Lind.[18] Mary joined these conversations and the ideas of Darwin, Galvani and perhaps Lind were present in her novel.

Shelley's personal experiences also influenced the themes within Frankenstein. The themes of loss, guilt, and the consequences of defying nature present in the novel all developed from Mary Shelley's own life. The loss of her mother, the relationship with her father, and the death of her first child are thought to have inspired the monster and his separation from parental guidance. In a 1965 issue of The Journal of Religion and Health a psychologist proposed that the theme of guilt stemmed from her not feeling good enough for Percy because of the loss of their child.[13]

Composition

During the rainy summer of 1816, the "Year Without a Summer", the world was locked in a long, cold volcanic winter caused by the eruption of Mount Tambora in 1815.[19][20] Mary Shelley, aged 18, and her lover (and future husband), Percy Bysshe Shelley, visited Lord Byron at the Villa Diodati by Lake Geneva, in Switzerland's Alps. The weather was too cold and dreary that summer to enjoy the outdoor holiday activities they had planned, so the group retired indoors until dawn.

Sitting around a log fire at Byron's villa, the company amused themselves by reading German ghost stories translated into French from the book Fantasmagoriana.[21] Byron proposed that they "each write a ghost story."[22] Unable to think of a story, Mary Shelley became anxious. She recalled being asked "Have you thought of a story?" each morning, and every time being "forced to reply with a mortifying negative."[23] During one evening in the middle of summer, the discussions turned to the nature of the principle of life. "Perhaps a corpse would be re-animated," Mary noted, "galvanism had given token of such things".[24] It was after midnight before they retired and, unable to sleep, she became possessed by her imagination as she beheld the "grim terrors" of her "waking dream".[6]

I saw the pale student of unhallowed arts kneeling beside the thing he had put together. I saw the hideous phantasm of a man stretched out, and then, on the working of some powerful engine, show signs of life, and stir with an uneasy, half vital motion. Frightful must it be; for supremely frightful would be the effect of any human endeavour to mock the stupendous mechanism of the Creator of the world.[25]

In September 2011, astronomer Donald Olson, after a visit to the Lake Geneva villa in the previous year and inspecting data about the motion of the moon and stars, concluded that her "waking dream" took place between 2 a.m. and 3 a.m. on 16 June 1816, several days after the initial idea by Lord Byron that they each write a ghost story.[26]

Mary Shelley began writing what she assumed would be a short story, but with Percy Shelley's encouragement, she expanded the tale into a fully-fledged novel.[27] She later described that summer in Switzerland as the moment "when I first stepped out from childhood into life."[28] Shelley wrote the first four chapters in the weeks following the suicide of her half-sister Fanny.[29] This was one of many personal tragedies that impacted Shelley's work. Shelley's first child died in infancy, and when she began composing Frankenstein in 1816, she was probably nursing her second child, who was also dead by the time of Frankenstein's publication.[30] Shelley wrote much of the book while residing in a lodging house in the centre of Bath in 1816.[31]

Byron managed to write just a fragment based on the vampire legends he heard while travelling the Balkans, and from this John Polidori created The Vampyre (1819), the progenitor of the romantic vampire literary genre. Thus two seminal horror tales originated from the conclave.[32][33][34]

The group talked about Enlightenment and Counter-Enlightenment ideas as well. Mary Shelley believed the Enlightenment idea that society could progress and grow if political leaders used their powers responsibly; however, she also believed the Romantic ideal that misused power could destroy society.[35]

Shelley's manuscripts for the first three-volume edition in 1818 (written 1816–1817), as well as the fair copy for her publisher, are now housed in the Bodleian Library in Oxford. The Bodleian acquired the papers in 2004, and they belong now to the Abinger Collection.[36][37] In 2008, the Bodleian published a new edition of Frankenstein, edited by Charles E. Robinson, that contains comparisons of Mary Shelley's original text with Percy Shelley's additions and interventions alongside.[38]

Frankenstein and the Monster

The Creature

Although the Creature was described in later works as a composite of whole body parts grafted together from cadavers and reanimated by the use of electricity, this description is not consistent with Shelley's work; both the use of electricity and the cobbled-together image of Frankenstein's monster were more the result of James Whale's popular 1931 film adaptation of the story and other early motion-picture works based on the creature. In Shelley's original work, Victor Frankenstein discovers a previously unknown but elemental principle of life, and that insight allows him to develop a method to imbue vitality into inanimate matter, though the exact nature of the process is left ambiguous. After a great deal of hesitation in exercising this power, Frankenstein spends two years painstakingly constructing the Creature's body (one anatomical feature at a time, from raw materials supplied by "the dissecting room and the slaughter-house"), which he then brings to life using his unspecified process.

Part of Frankenstein's rejection of his creation is the fact that he does not give him a name. Instead, Frankenstein's creation is referred to by words such as "wretch", "monster", "creature", "demon", "devil", "fiend", and "it". When Frankenstein converses with the creature, he addresses him as "vile insect", "abhorred monster", "fiend", "wretched devil", and "abhorred devil".

In the novel, the creature is compared to Adam,[40] the first man in the Garden of Eden. The monster also compares himself with the "fallen" angel. Speaking to Frankenstein, the monster says "I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather the fallen angel".  That angel would be Lucifer (meaning "light-bringer") in Milton's Paradise Lost, which the monster has read. Adam is also referred to in the epigraph of the 1818 edition:[41]

Some have posited the creature as a composite of Percy Shelley and Thomas Paine. If the creature's hatred for Victor and his desire to raise a child mirror Percy's filial rebelliousness and his longing to adopt children, his desire to do good and his persecution can be said to echo Paine's utopian visions and fate in England.[43]

The Creature has often been mistakenly called Frankenstein. In 1908, one author said "It is strange to note how well-nigh universally the term "Frankenstein" is misused, even by intelligent people, as describing some hideous monster."[44] Edith Wharton's The Reef (1916) describes an unruly child as an "infant Frankenstein".[45] David Lindsay's "The Bridal Ornament", published in The Rover, 12 June 1844, mentioned "the maker of poor Frankenstein". After the release of Whale's cinematic Frankenstein, the public at large began speaking of the Creature itself as "Frankenstein". This misnomer continued with the successful sequel Bride of Frankenstein (1935), as well as in film titles such as Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein.

Origin of Victor Frankenstein's name

Mary Shelley maintained that she derived the name Frankenstein from a dream-vision. This claim has since been disputed and debated by scholars that have suggested alternative sources for Shelley's inspiration.[47] The German name Frankenstein means "stone of the Franks", and is associated with various places in Germany, including Frankenstein Castle (Burg Frankenstein) in Darmstadt, Hesse, and Frankenstein Castle in Frankenstein, a town in the Palatinate. There is also a castle called Frankenstein in Bad Salzungen, Thuringia, and a municipality called Frankenstein in Saxony. The town of Frankenstein in Silesia (now Ząbkowice, Poland) was the site of a scandal involving gravediggers in 1606, and this has been suggested as an inspiration to the author.[48] Finally, the name is borne by the aristocratic House of Franckenstein from Franconia.

Radu Florescu argued that Mary and Percy Shelley visited Frankenstein Castle near Darmstadt in 1814, where alchemist Johann Konrad Dippel had experimented with human bodies, and reasoned that Mary suppressed mention of her visit to maintain her public claim of originality.[49] A literary essay by A.J. Day supports Florescu's position that Mary Shelley knew of and visited Frankenstein Castle before writing her debut novel.[50] Day includes details of an alleged description of the Frankenstein castle in Mary Shelley's "lost journals". However, according to Jörg Heléne, Day's and Florescu's claims cannot be verified.[51]

A possible interpretation of the name "Victor" is derived from Paradise Lost by John Milton, a great influence on Shelley (a quotation from Paradise Lost is on the opening page of Frankenstein and Shelley writes that the monster reads it in the novel).[52][53] Milton frequently refers to God as "the victor" in Paradise Lost, and Victor's creation of life in the novel is compared to God's creation of life in Paradise Lost. In addition, Shelley's portrayal of the monster owes much to the character of Satan in Paradise Lost; and, the monster says in the story, after reading the epic poem, that he empathizes with Satan's role.

Parallels between Victor Frankenstein and Mary's husband, Percy Shelley, have also been drawn. Percy Shelley was the first-born son of a wealthy country squire with strong political connections and a descendant of Sir Bysshe Shelley, 1st Baronet of Castle Goring, and Richard Fitzalan, 10th Earl of Arundel.[citation needed] Similarly, Victor's family is one of the most distinguished of that republic and his ancestors were counsellors and syndics. Percy's sister and Victor's adopted sister were both named Elizabeth. There are many other similarities, from Percy's usage of "Victor" as a pen name for Original Poetry by Victor and Cazire, a collection of poetry he wrote with Elizabeth,[54] to Percy's days at Eton, where he had "experimented with electricity and magnetism as well as with gunpowder and numerous chemical reactions," and the way in which Percy's rooms at Oxford were filled with scientific equipment.[55][56]

Modern Prometheus

The Modern Prometheus is the novel's subtitle (though modern editions now drop it, only mentioning it in introduction).[57] Prometheus, in versions of Greek mythology, was the Titan who created humans in the image of the gods so that they could have a spirit breathed into them at the behest of Zeus.[a] Prometheus then taught humans to hunt, but after he tricked Zeus into accepting "poor-quality offerings" from humans, Zeus kept fire from humankind. Prometheus took back the fire from Zeus to give to humanity. When Zeus discovered this, he sentenced Prometheus to be eternally punished by fixing him to a rock of Caucasus, where each day an eagle pecked out his liver, only for the liver to regrow the next day because of his immortality as a god.

As a Pythagorean, or believer in An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty by Joseph Ritson,[58] Mary Shelley saw Prometheus not as a hero but rather as something of a devil, and blamed him for bringing fire to humanity and thereby seducing the human race to the vice of eating meat.[59][full citation needed] Percy wrote several essays on what became known as vegetarianism including A Vindication of Natural Diet.[58]

Byron was particularly attached to the play Prometheus Bound by Aeschylus, and Percy Shelley soon wrote his own Prometheus Unbound (1820). The term "Modern Prometheus" was derived from Immanuel Kant who described Benjamin Franklin as the "Prometheus of modern times" in reference to his experiments with electricity.[60]

Publication

Shelley completed her writing in April/May 1817, and Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus was published on 1 January 1818[61] by the small London publishing house Lackington, Hughes, Harding, Mavor, & Jones.[62][63] It was issued anonymously, with a preface written for Mary by Percy Bysshe Shelley and with a dedication to philosopher William Godwin, her father. It was published in an edition of just 500 copies in three volumes, the standard "triple-decker" format for 19th-century first editions.

A French translation (Frankenstein: ou le Prométhée Moderne, translated by Jules Saladin) appeared as early as 1821. The second English edition of Frankenstein was published on 11 August 1823 in two volumes (by G. and W. B. Whittaker) following the success of the stage play Presumption; or, the Fate of Frankenstein by Richard Brinsley Peake.[64] This edition credited Mary Shelley as the book's author on its title page.

On 31 October 1831, the first "popular" edition in one volume appeared, published by Henry Colburn & Richard Bentley.[65] This edition was heavily revised by Mary Shelley, partially to make the story less radical. It included a lengthy new preface by the author, presenting a somewhat embellished version of the genesis of the story. This edition is the one most widely published and read now, although a few editions follow the 1818 text.[66] Some scholars such as Anne K. Mellor prefer the original version, arguing that it preserves the spirit of Mary Shelley's vision.[67]

Reception

Contemporary critical reviews were mixed. Walter Scott, writing in Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, praised the novel as an "extraordinary tale, in which the author seems to us to disclose uncommon powers of poetic imagination," although he was less convinced about the way in which the monster gains knowledge about the world and language.[68] La Belle Assemblée described the novel as "very bold fiction"[69] and the Edinburgh Magazine and Literary Miscellany hoped to see "more productions ... from this author".[70] On the other hand, John Wilson Croker, writing anonymously in the Quarterly Review, although conceding that "the author has powers, both of conception and language," described the book as "a tissue of horrible and disgusting absurdity."[71]

The British Critic attacked the novel's flaws as the fault of the author:

The writer of it is, we understand, a female; this is an aggravation of that which is the prevailing fault of the novel; but if our authoress can forget the gentleness of her sex, it is no reason why we should; and we shall therefore dismiss the novel without further comment.[72]

The Literary Panorama and National Register attacked the novel as a "feeble imitation of Mr. Godwin's novels" produced by the "daughter of a celebrated living novelist."[73]

Despite these reviews, Frankenstein achieved an almost immediate popular success. It became widely known, especially through melodramatic theatrical adaptations. Mary Shelley saw a production of Presumption; or The Fate of Frankenstein, a play by Richard Brinsley Peake, in 1823.

Critical reception of Frankenstein has been largely positive since the mid-20th century.[74] Major critics such as M. A. Goldberg and Harold Bloom have praised the "aesthetic and moral" relevance of the novel,[75] although there have also been critics, such as Germaine Greer, who criticized the novel for technical and narrative defects: for example, she claimed that its three narrators all speak in the same way.[76] In more recent years the novel has become a popular subject for psychoanalytic and feminist criticism: Lawrence Lipking states: "[E]ven the Lacanian subgroup of psychoanalytic criticism, for instance, has produced at least half a dozen discrete readings of the novel".[77] Frankenstein has frequently been recommended on Five Books, with literary scholars, psychologists, novelists, and historians citing it as an influential text.[78] Today, the novel is generally considered to be a landmark work as one of the greatest Romantic and Gothic novels, as well as one of the first science fiction novels.[79]

Brian Aldiss has argued for regarding it as the first true science-fiction story. In contrast to previous stories with fantastical elements resembling those of later science fiction, Aldiss states, the central character "makes a deliberate decision" and "turns to modern experiments in the laboratory" to achieve fantastic results.[80]

Film director Guillermo del Toro describes Frankenstein as "the quintessential teenage book", noting that the feelings that "You don't belong. You were brought to this world by people that don't care for you and you are thrown into a world of pain and suffering, and tears and hunger" are an important part of the story. He adds that "it's an amazing book written by a teenage girl. It's mind-blowing."[81] Professor of philosophy Patricia MacCormack says that the Creature addresses the most fundamental human questions: "It's the idea of asking your maker what your purpose is. Why are we here, what can we do?"[81]

On 5 November 2019, BBC News included Frankenstein in its list of the 100 most influential novels.[82] In 2018, Jersey Post released series of 8 stamps celebrating the 200th anniversary of Frankenstein.[83] In 2021 it was one of six classic science fiction novels by British authors selected by Royal Mail to be featured on a series of UK postage stamps.[84]

Films, plays, and television

The 1931 film,[85] with Boris Karloff playing the monster, is considered the most prominent portrayal of Frankenstein.[86]

See also

United Kingdom portalBooks portal

Authorship of Frankenstein
Frankenstein argument
Frankenstein complex
Frankenstein in Baghdad
Frankenstein in popular culture
Frankenstein's Promethean dimension
Golem
Gothic (film)
Gothic aspects in Frankenstein
Homunculus
John Murray Spear
List of works based on dreams

Notes

^ In the best-known versions of the Prometheus story, by Hesiod and Aeschylus, Prometheus merely brings fire to humankind, but in other versions, such as several of Aesop's fables (See in particular Fable 516), Sappho (Fragment 207), and Ovid's Metamorphoses, Prometheus is the actual creator of humanity.

References

^ Stableford, Brian (1995). "Frankenstein and the Origins of Science Fiction". In Seed, David (ed.). Anticipations: Essays on Early Science Fiction and its Precursors. Syracuse University Press. pp. 47–49. ISBN 978-0815626404. Retrieved 19 July 2018.

^ Hobbler, Dorthy and Thomas. The Monsters: Mary Shelley and the Curse of Frankenstein. Back Bay Books; 20 August 2007.

^ Garrett, Martin. Mary Shelley. Oxford University Press, 2002

^ Seymour, Miranda. Mary Shelley. Atlanta, GA: Grove Press, 2002. pp. 110–11

^ McGasko, Joe. "Her 'Midnight Pillow': Mary Shelley and the Creation of Frankenstein". Biography. Archived from the original on 19 February 2019. Retrieved 18 February 2019.

^ a b Shelley, Mary W. "Frankenstein: or, The Modern Prometheus". Paragraphs 11-13. Retrieved 29 December 2022 – via Project Gutenberg.

^ Bergen Evans, Comfortable Words, New York: Random House, 1957

^ Bryan Garner, A Dictionary of Modern American Usage, New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.

^ 
Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of American English, Merriam-Webster: 2002.

^ Lepore, Jill (5 February 2018). "The Strange and Twisted Life of "Frankenstein"". The New Yorker. ISSN 0028-792X. Archived from the original on 22 February 2018. Retrieved 4 March 2019.

^ "Mary Shelley's "Frankenstein" is published". History.com. Retrieved 11 February 2021.

^ "Frankenstein: Penetrating the Secrets of Nature: The Birth of Frankenstein". nlm.nih.gov. Archived from the original on 29 November 2018. Retrieved 20 November 2018.

^ a b Badalamenti, Anthony (Fall 2006). "Why did Mary Shelley Write Frankenstein". Journal of Religion and Health. 45 (3): 419–39. doi:10.1007/s10943-006-9030-0. ISSN 0022-4197. JSTOR 27512949. S2CID 37615140.

^ "Pollin, "Philosophical and Literary Sources"". knarf.english.upenn.edu. Archived from the original on 5 April 2019. Retrieved 26 May 2019.

^ Pollin, Burton (Spring 1965). "Philosophical and Literary Sources of Frankenstein". Comparative Literature. 17 (2): 97–108. doi:10.2307/1769997. JSTOR 1769997.

^ Douthwaite, Julia V. "The Frankenstein of the French Revolution". The Frankenstein of 1790 and Other Lost Chapters from Revolutionary France. University of Chicago Press. Archived from the original on 16 November 2012.

^ Ruston, Sharon (25 November 2015). "The Science of Life and Death in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein". The Public Domain Review. Archived from the original on 26 November 2015. Retrieved 25 November 2015.

^ "Lind, James (1736–1812) on JSTOR". plants.jstor.org. Retrieved 8 May 2021.

^ Marshall, Alan (January 2020). "Did a Volcanic Eruption in Indonesia Really Lead to the Creation of Frankenstein?". The Conversation.

^ Sunstein 1989, p. 118.

^ Dr. John Polidori, "The Vampyre" 1819, The New Monthly Magazine and Universal Register; London: H. Colburn, 1814–1820. Vol. 1, No. 63.

^ paragraph 7, Introduction, Frankenstein 1831 edition

^ paragraph 8, Introduction, Frankenstein 1831 edition

^ paragraph 10, Introduction, Frankenstein 1831 edition

^ Quoted in Spark, 157, from Mary Shelley's introduction to the 1831 edition of Frankenstein.

^ Radford, Tim (25 September 2011). "Frankenstein's hour of creation identified by astronomers". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2 March 2017. Retrieved 29 December 2022.

^ Bennett 1998, pp. 30–31; Sunstein 1989, p. 124.

^ Sunstein 1989, p. 117.

^ Hay, 103.

^ Lepore, Jill (5 February 2018). "The Strange and Twisted Life of 'Frankenstein'". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 22 February 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2018.

^ Kennedy, Maev (26 February 2018). "'A 200-year-old secret': plaque to mark Bath's hidden role in Frankenstein". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 November 2018. Retrieved 13 November 2018.

^ "Frankenstein and the Vampyre: A Dark and Stormy Night". BBC Two. BBC. Retrieved 28 December 2024.

^ "Frankenstein and the Vampyre: A Dark and Stormy Night - BBC Literary Archive". Educational Recording Agency Limited. Retrieved 28 December 2024.

^ "Frankenstein and the Vampyre: A Dark and Stormy Night". Films Media Group. Retrieved 29 December 2024.

^ Bennett 1998, pp. 36–42.

^ "OX.ac.uk". Bodley.ox.ac.uk. 15 December 2009. Archived from the original on 5 December 2017. Retrieved 28 August 2010.

^ "Shelley's Ghost – Reshaping the image of a literary family". shelleysghost.bodleian.ox.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 10 August 2019. Retrieved 19 September 2019.

^ Mary Shelley, with Percy Shelley (2008). Charles E. Robinson (ed.). The Original Frankenstein. Oxford: Bodleian Library. ISBN 978-1-851-24396-9. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015.

^ "Frankenstein:Celluloid Monster". National Library of Medicine of the National Institute of Health. Archived from the original on 15 May 2016.

^ "Frankenstein: Penetrating the Secrets of Nature / Exhibit Text" (PDF). National Library of Medicine and ALA Public Programs Office. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 December 2006. Retrieved 31 December 2007. from the travelling exhibition Frankenstein: Penetrating the Secrets of Nature Archived 9 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine

^ Shelley, Mary (1818). Frankenstein (1 ed.).

^ John Milton, Paradise Lost (X. 743–45)

^ Chiu, Frances A. "Reform, Revolution, and the relevance of Frankenstein in 2020" in Frankenstein Reanimated: Conversations with Artists in Dystopian Times, ed. by Marc Garrett and Yiannis Colakides. London: Torque, 2022, 33–44.

^ Johnson, Rossiter (1908). Author's digest : the world's great stories in brief. Vol. 16, Robert Louis Stevenson to Albion Winegar Tourgée. unknown library. [New York] : Issued under the auspices of the Author's Press.

^ The Reef, p. 96.

^ This illustration is reprinted in the frontispiece to the 2008 edition of Frankenstein Archived 7 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine

^ Gray, Paul (23 July 1979). "Books: The Man-Made Monster". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved 21 September 2020.

^ zapomniana, Historia (24 January 2016). "Afera grabarzy z Frankenstein". Archived from the original on 3 February 2018. Retrieved 15 February 2017.

^ Florescu 1996, pp. 48–92.

^ Day, A.J. (2005). Fantasmagoriana (Tales of the Dead). Fantasmagoriana Press. pp. 149–51. ISBN 978-1-4116-5291-0.

^ Heléne, Jörg (12 September 2016). "Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, Castle Frankenstein and the alchemist Johann Conrad Dippel". Darmstadt. Archived from the original on 7 October 2016. Retrieved 23 June 2017.

^ "Wade, Phillip. "Shelley and the Miltonic Element in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein." Milton and the Romantics, 2 (December, 1976), 23–25". Archived from the original on 14 April 2011. Retrieved 5 August 2011.

^ Jones 1952, pp. 496–97.

^ Sandy, Mark (20 September 2002). "Original Poetry by Victor and Cazire". The Literary Encyclopedia. The Literary Dictionary Company. Archived from the original on 8 November 2006. Retrieved 2 January 2007.

^ "Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792–1822)". Romantic Natural History. Department of English, Dickinson College. Archived from the original on 16 August 2006. Retrieved 2 January 2007.

^ Goulding, Christopher (2002). "The real Doctor Frankenstein?". Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. 95 (5): 257–259. doi:10.1177/014107680209500514. ISSN 0141-0768. PMC 1279684. PMID 11983772.

^ For example, the Longman study edition published in India in 2007 by Pearson Education

^ a b Morton, Timothy (21 September 2006). The Cambridge Companion to Shelley. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781139827072.

^ (Leonard Wolf, p. 20).

^ "Benjamin Franklin in London". The Royal Society. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 8 August 2007.

^ Robinson, Charles (1996). The Frankenstein Notebooks: A Facsimile Edition. Vol. 1. Garland Publishing, Inc. p. xxv. Archived from the original on 16 March 2017. Retrieved 15 March 2017. She began that novel as Mary Godwin in June 1816 when she was eighteen years old, she finished it as Mary Shelley in April/May 1817 when she was nineteen . . . and she published it anonymously on 1 January 1818 when she was twenty.

^ Bennett 1998.

^ D. L. Macdonald and Kathleen Scherf, "A Note on the Text", Frankenstein, 2nd ed., Peterborough: Broadview Press, 1999.

^ Wollstonecraft Shelley, Mary (2000). Frankenstein. Bedford Publishing. p. 3. ISBN 978-0312227623.

^ See forward to Barnes and Noble classic edition.[full citation needed]

^ The edition published by Forgotten Books is the original text, as is the "Ignatius Critical Edition". Vintage Books has an edition presenting both versions.

^ Mellor, Anne K. (1990). "Choosing a Text of Frankenstein to Teach". In Behrendt, Stephen C. (ed.). Approaches to Teaching Shelley's Frankenstein. New York: Modern Language Association of America. pp. 31–37. ISBN 0-87352-539-6. [Reprinted in the Norton Critical Edition.]

^ Scott, Walter (March 1818). "Remarks on Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus; A Novel". Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine: 613–620. Archived from the original on 14 January 2020. Retrieved 14 January 2020.

^ "Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus. 3 vols. 12mo. Lackington and Co". La Belle Assemblée. New Series. 1 February 1818. pp. 139–142. Archived from the original on 14 January 2020. Retrieved 14 January 2020.

^ "Review – Frankenstein". The Edinburgh Magazine and Literary Miscellany. New Series. March 1818. pp. 249–253.

^ "Review of Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus". The Quarterly Review. 18: 379–85. January 1818. Archived from the original on 6 November 2018. Retrieved 18 March 2017.

^ "Art. XII. Frankenstein: or the Modern Prometheus. 3 vols. 12mo. 16s. 6d. Lackington and Co. 1818". The British Critic. New Series. 9: 432–438. April 1818. Archived from the original on 14 January 2020. Retrieved 14 January 2020.

^ "Frankenstein; or, the modern Prometheus. 3 vols. Lackington and Co. 1818". The Literary Panorama and National Register. New Series. 8: 411–414. June 1818. Archived from the original on 14 January 2020. Retrieved 14 January 2020.

^ "Enotes.com". Enotes.com. Archived from the original on 24 September 2010. Retrieved 28 August 2010.

^ "KCTCS.edu". Octc.kctcs.edu. Archived from the original on 15 November 2004. Retrieved 28 August 2010.

^ Germaine Greer (9 April 2007). "Yes, Frankenstein really was written by Mary Shelley. It's obvious – because the book is so bad". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 October 2016. Retrieved 4 October 2016.

^ L. Lipking. Frankenstein the True Story; or Rousseau Judges Jean-Jacques. (Published in the Norton critical edition. 1996)

^ Five Books. "Frankenstein by Mary Shelley | Five Books Expert Reviews". Five Books. Archived from the original on 24 March 2019. Retrieved 13 September 2019.

^ Alexander, Lynn. "Mary Shelley, Frankenstein". Department of English, University of Tennessee at Martin. Archived from the original on 3 December 2010. Retrieved 27 August 2009.

^ Aldiss, Brian Wilson (1995). The detached retina : aspects of SF and fantasy. Internet Archive. Syracuse, N.Y. : Syracuse University Press. ISBN 978-0-8156-2681-7.

^ a b "Frankenstein: Behind the monster smash". BBC. 1 January 2018. Archived from the original on 27 July 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018.

^ "100 'most inspiring' novels revealed by BBC Arts". BBC News. 5 November 2019. Archived from the original on 8 November 2019. Retrieved 10 November 2019. The reveal kickstarts the BBC's year-long celebration of literature.

^ "Celebrating the 200th anniversary of Frankenstein! Eight spooky stamps introduced by Jersey Post". findyourstampsvalue.com. 8 May 2018. Retrieved 28 November 2024.

^ "Stamps to feature original artworks celebrating classic science fiction novels". Yorkpress.co.uk. 9 April 2021. Retrieved 20 September 2022.

^ "Frankenstein. 1931.1080p. Blu Ray. H 264. AAC RARBG." Internet Archive, 1931, archive.org/details/frankenstein.1931.1080p.bluray.h264.aacrarbg.

^ Anderson, John (25 January 2022). "'Boris Karloff: The Man Behind the Monster' Review: A Very Different Creature". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 26 January 2022.

Sources

Aldiss, Brian W. "On the Origin of Species: Mary Shelley". Speculations on Speculation: Theories of Science Fiction. Eds. James Gunn and Matthew Candelaria. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow, 2005.
Baldick, Chris. In Frankenstein's Shadow: Myth, Monstrosity, and Nineteenth-Century Writing. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987.
Bann, Stephen, ed. "Frankenstein": Creation and Monstrosity. London: Reaktion, 1994.
Behrendt, Stephen C., ed. Approaches to Teaching Shelley's "Frankenstein". New York: MLA, 1990.
Bennett, Betty T.; Stuart, Curran, eds. (2000). Mary Shelley in Her Times. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0801877334.
Bennett, Betty T. (1998). Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley: An Introduction. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 080185976X.
Bohls, Elizabeth A. "Standards of Taste, Discourses of 'Race', and the Aesthetic Education of a Monster: Critique of Empire in Frankenstein". Eighteenth-Century Life 18.3 (1994): 23–36.
Botting, Fred. Making Monstrous: "Frankenstein", Criticism, Theory. New York: St. Martin's, 1991.
Chapman, D. That Not Impossible She: A study of gender construction and Individualism in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, UK: Concept, 2011. ISBN 978-1480047617
Clery, E. J. Women's Gothic: From Clara Reeve to Mary Shelley. Plymouth: Northcote House, 2000.
Conger, Syndy M., Frederick S. Frank, and Gregory O'Dea, eds. Iconoclastic Departures: Mary Shelley after "Frankenstein": Essays in Honor of the Bicentenary of Mary Shelley's Birth. Madison, New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1997.
Donawerth, Jane. Frankenstein's Daughters: Women Writing Science Fiction. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 1997.
Douthwaite, Julia V. "The Frankenstein of the French Revolution," chapter two of The Frankenstein of 1790 and other Lost Chapters from Revolutionary France Archived 16 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012.
Dunn, Richard J. "Narrative Distance in Frankenstein". Studies in the Novel 6 (1974): 408–17.
Eberle-Sinatra, Michael, ed. Mary Shelley's Fictions: From "Frankenstein" to "Falkner". New York: St. Martin's Press, 2000.
Ellis, Kate Ferguson. The Contested Castle: Gothic Novels and the Subversion of Domestic Ideology. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1989.
Florescu, Radu (1996). In Search of Frankenstein: Exploring the Myths Behind Mary Shelley's Monster (2nd ed.). London: Robson Books. ISBN 978-1-861-05033-5.
Forry, Steven Earl. Hideous Progenies: Dramatizations of "Frankenstein" from Mary Shelley to the Present. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1990.
Freedman, Carl. "Hail Mary: On the Author of Frankenstein and the Origins of Science Fiction". Science Fiction Studies 29.2 (2002): 253–64.
Gigante, Denise. "Facing the Ugly: The Case of Frankenstein". ELH 67.2 (2000): 565–87.
Gilbert, Sandra and Susan Gubar. The Madwoman in the Attic: The Woman Writer and the Nineteenth-Century Literary Imagination. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1979.
Hay, Daisy "Young Romantics" (2010): 103.
Heffernan, James A. W. "Looking at the Monster: Frankenstein and Film". Critical Inquiry 24.1 (1997): 133–58.
Hodges, Devon. "Frankenstein and the Feminine Subversion of the Novel". Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature 2.2 (1983): 155–64.
Hoeveler, Diane Long. Gothic Feminism: The Professionalization of Gender from Charlotte Smith to the Brontës. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1998.
Holmes, Richard. Shelley: The Pursuit. 1974. London: Harper Perennial, 2003. ISBN 0-00-720458-2.
Jones, Frederick L. (1952). "Shelley and Milton". Studies in Philology. 49 (3): 488–519. JSTOR 4173024.
Knoepflmacher, U. C. and George Levine, eds. The Endurance of "Frankenstein": Essays on Mary Shelley's Novel. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979.
Lew, Joseph W. "The Deceptive Other: Mary Shelley's Critique of Orientalism in Frankenstein". Studies in Romanticism 30.2 (1991): 255–83.
London, Bette. "Mary Shelley, Frankenstein, and the Spectacle of Masculinity". PMLA 108.2 (1993): 256–67.
Mellor, Anne K. Mary Shelley: Her Life, Her Fiction, Her Monsters. New York: Methuen, 1988.
Michaud, Nicolas, Frankenstein and Philosophy: The Shocking Truth, Chicago: Open Court, 2013.
Miles, Robert. Gothic Writing 1750–1820: A Genealogy. London: Routledge, 1993.
Milner, Andrew. Literature, Culture and Society. London: Routledge, 2005, ch.5.
O'Flinn, Paul. "Production and Reproduction: The Case of Frankenstein". Literature and History 9.2 (1983): 194–213.
Poovey, Mary. The Proper Lady and the Woman Writer: Ideology as Style in the Works of Mary Wollstonecraft, Mary Shelley, and Jane Austen. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.
Rauch, Alan. "The Monstrous Body of Knowledge in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein". Studies in Romanticism 34.2 (1995): 227–53.
Selbanev, Xtopher. "Natural Philosophy of the Soul", Western Press, 1999.
Schor, Esther, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Mary Shelley. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Scott, Grant F. (April–June 2012). "Victor's Secret: Queer Gothic in Lynd Ward's Illustrations to Frankenstein (1934)". Word & Image. 28 (2): 206–32. doi:10.1080/02666286.2012.687545. S2CID 154238300.
Smith, Johanna M., ed. Frankenstein. Case Studies in Contemporary Criticism. Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's, 1992.
Spark, Muriel. Mary Shelley. London: Cardinal, 1987. ISBN 0-7474-0318-X.
Stableford, Brian. "Frankenstein and the Origins of Science Fiction". Anticipations: Essays on Early Science Fiction and Its Precursors. Ed. David Seed. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 1995.
Sunstein, Emily W. (1989). Mary Shelley: Romance and Reality (1991 ed.). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0801842182.
Tropp, Martin. Mary Shelley's Monster. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1976.
Veeder, William. Mary Shelley & Frankenstein: The Fate of Androgyny. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986.
Williams, Anne. The Art of Darkness: A Poetics of Gothic. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.

Further reading

Holmes, Richard (21 December 2017). "Out of Control". The New York Review of Books. Archived from the original on 14 December 2017. Retrieved 29 December 2024. After two hundred years, how exactly are we to go back to Mary Shelley's 'Frankenstein' itself, as distinct from its proliferating, multimedia myth?, review of:

Mary Shelley, Frankenstein, Or, The Modern Prometheus:  Annotated for Scientists, Engineers, and Creators of All Kinds, edited by David H. Guston, Ed Finn, and Jason Scott Robert, MIT Press, 277 pp.
Mary Shelley, The New Annotated Frankenstein, edited and with a foreword and notes by Leslie S. Klinger, Liveright, 352 pp.), The New York Review of Books, vol. LXIV, no. 20 (21 December 2017), pp. 38, 40–41.

Editions

Shelley, Mary Frankenstein: 1818 text (Oxford University Press, 2009). Edited with an introduction and notes by Marilyn Butler.
Shelley, Mary Frankenstein: The 1818 Text (Penguin Books, 2018). Edited with an introduction by Charlotte Gordon.
Mary Shelley, Frankenstein, Or, The Modern Prometheus:  Annotated for Scientists, Engineers, and Creators of All Kinds, edited by David H. Guston, Ed Finn, and Jason Scott Robert, MIT Press, 277 pp. doi:10.7551/mitpress/10815.001.0001

Fairclough, Peter (ed.) Three Gothic Novels: Walpole / Castle of Otranto, Beckford / Vathek, Mary Shelley / Frankenstein (Penguin English Library, 1968). With an introductory essay by Mario Praz.
Shelley, Mary Frankenstein (Oxford University Press, 2008). Edited with an introduction and notes by M. K. Joseph.

Differences between 1818 and 1831 text

Shelley made several alterations in the 1831 edition including:

The epigraph from Milton's Paradise Lost found in the 1818 original has been removed.
Chapter one is expanded and split into two chapters.
Elizabeth's origin is changed from Victor's cousin to being an orphan.
Victor is portrayed more sympathetically in the original text. In the 1831 edition however, Shelley is critical of his decisions and actions.
Shelley removed many references to scientific ideas which were popular around the time she wrote the 1818 edition of the book.
Characters in the 1831 version have some dialogue removed entirely while others receive new dialogue.

External links

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceData from Wikidata

Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley: Chronology and Resources at Romantic Circles
"Frankenstein: a hypertext resource". English Department. University of Saskatchewan.
Frankenstein at SparkNotes

Editions

Frankenstein 1818 edition at Project Gutenberg

 Frankenstein 1831 edition at Project Gutenberg
Frankenstein at Romantic Circles

Frankenstein public domain audiobook at LibriVox
Frankenstein at Standard Ebooks

Sources

Shelley's notebooks with her handwritten draft of Frankenstein

Volume one Archived 10 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine
Volume two Archived 30 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine

Reception

On Frankenstein, a review by Percy Bysshe Shelley

vte

Frankenstein's monster
Victor Frankenstein
Doctor Waldman
Elizabeth Lavenza

Frankenstein (1931)
Bride of Frankenstein (1935)
Son of Frankenstein (1939)
The Ghost of Frankenstein (1942)
Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man (1943)
House of Frankenstein (1944)
House of Dracula (1945)
Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein (1948)

Igor
Doctor Septimus Pretorius
Wolf Frankenstein
Bride of Frankenstein
Ludwig Frankenstein

The Curse of Frankenstein (1957)
The Revenge of Frankenstein (1958)
The Evil of Frankenstein (1964)
Frankenstein Created Woman (1967)
Frankenstein Must Be Destroyed (1969)
The Horror of Frankenstein (1970)
Frankenstein and the Monster from Hell (1974)

Frankenstein vs. Baragon (1965)
The War of the Gargantuas (1966)

Mad Monster Party? (1967)
Mad Mad Mad Monsters (1972)
Young Frankenstein (1974)
Frankenstein all'italiana (1975)
Frankenweenie (1984)
Transylvania 6-5000 (1985)
The Monster Squad (1987)
Frankenhooker (1990)
Monster Mash (1995)
Alvin and the Chipmunks Meet Frankenstein (1999)
Monster Mash (2000)
Frankenström (2001)
Frankenthumb (2002)
Igor (2008)
The Bride of Gingy (2010)
Frankenweenie (2012)
Scooby-Doo! Frankencreepy (2014)
Monster Family (2017)
Lisa Frankenstein (2024)

Munster, Go Home! (1966)
The Munsters' Revenge (1981)
Here Come the Munsters (1995)
The Munsters' Scary Little Christmas (1996)
The Munsters (2022)

Hotel Transylvania (2012)
Hotel Transylvania 2 (2015)
Hotel Transylvania 3: Summer Vacation (2018)
Hotel Transylvania: Transformania (2022)

Frankenstein (1910)
Life Without Soul (1915)
Il mostro di Frankenstein (1921)
I Was a Teenage Frankenstein (1957)
Frankenstein 1970 (1958)
Frankenstein's Daughter (1958)
Frankenstein Meets the Space Monster (1965)
Jesse James Meets Frankenstein's Daughter (1966)
Los Monstruos del Terror (1970)
Lady Frankenstein (1971)
Dracula vs. Frankenstein (1971)
Frankenstein '80 (1972)
Flesh for Frankenstein (1973)
Blackenstein (1973)
Frankenstein's Castle of Freaks (1974)
Frankenstein Legend of Terror (1981)
Frankenstein Island (1981)
The Bride (1985)
The Vindicator (1986)
Frankenstein Unbound (1990)
Frankenstein (1992)
Return from Death (Frankenstein 2000) (1992)
Mary Shelley's Frankenstein (1994)
Van Helsing (2004)
Frankenstein vs. the Creature from Blood Cove (2005)
Vampire Girl vs. Frankenstein Girl (2009)
House of the Wolf Man (2009)
Frankenstein: Day of the Beast (2011)
Frankenstein's Army (2013)
The Frankenstein Theory (2013)
I, Frankenstein (2014)
Army of Frankensteins (2014)
Frankenstein vs. The Mummy (2015)
Frankenstein (2015)
Victor Frankenstein (2015)
The Great Yokai War: Guardians (2021)
The Angry Black Girl and Her Monster (2023)
Frankenstein (2025)
The Bride! (2026)

Tales of Frankenstein (1958)
The Munsters (1964–1966)
Frankenstein Jr. and The Impossibles (1966–1968)
Groovie Goolies (1970-1971)
Frankenstein (1973)
Frankenstein: The True Story (1973)
Monster Squad (1976)
Struck by Lightning (1979)
The Munsters Today (1988-1991)
Monster Force (1994)
House of Frankenstein (1997)
Frankenstein (2004 TV film)
Frankenstein (2004 miniseries)
Frankenstein (2007)
Mary Shelley's Frankenhole (2010)
Once Upon a Time
"The Doctor" (2012)
"In the Name of the Brother" (2013)
Penny Dreadful (2014–2016)
Frankenstein, MD (2014)
The Frankenstein Chronicles (2015–2017)
Second Chance (2016)
Hotel Transylvania: The Series (2017–2020)
Code:Realize − Guardian of Rebirth (2017)

"The Doctor" (2012)
"In the Name of the Brother" (2013)

Presumption; or, the Fate of Frankenstein (1823)
Frankenstein, or The Vampire's Victim (1887)
Frankenstein (1927)
Fortitude (1968)
Joined At The Heart (2007)
Frankenstein – A New Musical (2007)
Young Frankenstein (2007)
Frankenstein (2011 play)
Frankenstein's Wedding (2011 play)

Frankenstein's Aunt (1978)
Gothic Romance (1984)
Frankenstein's Aunt Returns (1989)
Frankenstein's Cat  (2001)
Dean Koontz's Frankenstein
Prodigal Son (2005)
City of Night (2005)
Dead and Alive (2009)
Lost Souls (2010)
The Dead Town (2011)
Frankenstein in Baghdad (2013)

Prodigal Son (2005)
City of Night (2005)
Dead and Alive (2009)
Lost Souls (2010)
The Dead Town (2011)

Bernie Wrightson's Frankenstein
Frankenstein (DC Comics)
Frankenstein (Dell Comics)
Doc Frankenstein
Embalming
Frankenstein's Monster (Marvel Comics)
Frankenstein (Prize Comics)
Young Frankenstein

Frankenstein's Monster
Frankenstein
Frankenstein: The Monster Returns
Dr. Franken
Mary Shelley's Frankenstein
Frankenstein: Through the Eyes of the Monster
Van Helsing
Code: Realize

Gothic aspects in Frankenstein
Universal Classic Monsters
Frankenstein in popular culture
Frankenstein Castle
Frankenstein Day
Frankenstein's Promethean dimension
Johann Konrad Dippel
Frankenstein complex
Frankenstrat (guitar)
"Frankenstein" (1973 single)
"Dr. Stein" (1988 single)
Frankenstein (Death Race)

vte

History of a Six Weeks' Tour
Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus
Mathilda
Proserpine
Midas
Valperga
"Maurice"
The Last Man
The Fortunes of Perkin Warbeck
"The Mortal Immortal"
Lodore
Falkner
Rambles in Germany and Italy
Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men

Percy Bysshe Shelley (husband)
Sir Percy Shelley, 3rd Baronet (son)
Mary Wollstonecraft (mother)
William Godwin (father)
Fanny Imlay (half-sister)
Claire Clairmont (stepsister)

Bloody Poetry (1984 play)
Gothic (1986 film)
Rowing with the Wind (1988 film)
Haunted Summer (1988 film)
Mary Shelley (2017 film)
"The Haunting of Villa Diodati" (2020 TV episode)

Mounseer Nongtongpaw
Frankenstein in popular culture
Lord Byron
John William Polidori
Thomas Jefferson Hogg
Villa Diodati
Frankenstein Day

VIAF

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataAustraliaCzech RepublicSpainCroatiaIsrael

IdRefMusicBrainz work

vte

Christine de Pizan (1364–1430)

Margaret Cavendish (1623–1673)

Marie-Anne Robert (1705–1771)
 Mary Griffith (1772–1846)

Mary Shelley (1797–1851)
 Jane Wells Webb Loudon (1807–1858)
 Annie Denton Cridge (1825–1875)
 Rhoda Broughton (1840–1920)
 Bertha von Suttner (1843–1914)
 Mary E. Bradley Lane (1844–1930)
 Elizabeth Burgoyne Corbett (1846–1930)
 Auguste Groner (1850–1929)
 Renée Marie Gouraud d'Ablancourt (1853–1941)
 Irene Clyde (1869–1954)
 Charlotte Perkins Gilman (1860–1935)
 Inez Haynes Irwin (1873–1970)
 Rokeya Sakhawat Hussain (1880–1932)
 Rosa Rosà (1884—1978)
 Miriam Allen DeFord (1888–1975)
 Aurora Bertrana (1892—1974)
 Anna Banti (1895—1985)
 L. Taylor Hansen (1897–1976)

Karin Boye (1900—1941)
 Stella Gibbons (1902–1989)
 Leslie F. Stone (1905–1991)
 C. L. Moore (1911–1987)
 James Tiptree Jr. (1915—1987)
 Alice Eleanor Jones (1916–1981)
 Shirley Jackson (1916–1965)
 Elisabeth Mann-Borgese (1918—2002)
 Madeleine L'Engle (1918–2007)
 Doris Lessing (1919–2013)
 Marlen Haushofer (1920–1970)
 Françoise d'Eaubonne (1920–2005)
 Carol Emshwiller (1921–2019)
 Virginia Kidd (1921—2003)
 Judith Merril (1923–1997)
 Kate Wilhelm (1928—2018)
 Sonya Dorman (1924–2005)
 Angélica Gorodischer (1928–2022)
 Ursula K. Le Guin (1929–2018)
 Sheri S. Tepper (1929—2016)
 Sally Miller Gearhart (1931—2021)
 Fay Weldon (1931—2023)
 Nancy Bogen b. 1932
  Sophie Behr (b. 1935)
 Marge Piercy (b. 1936)
 Joanna Russ (1937–2011)
 Margaret Atwood (b. 1939)
 Suzy McKee Charnas (1939–2023)
 Jutta Heinrich (1940–2021)
 Gerd Brantenberg (b. 1941)
 Chelsea Quinn Yarbro (b. 1942)
 Eleanor Arnason (b. 1942)
 Samuel R. Delany (b. 1942)
 Donna Haraway (b. 1944)
 Rachel Pollack (1945–2023)
 Elizabeth A. Lynn (b. 1946)
 Octavia E. Butler (1947–2006)
 Joëlle Wintrebert (b. 1949)
 Lois McMaster Bujold (b. 1949 )
 Dubravka Ugrešić (b. 1949)
 Roz Kaveney (b. 1949)
 Karen Joy Fowler (b. 1950)
 L. Timmel Duchamp (b. 1950)
 Charlotte Kerner (b. 1950)
 Leigh Kennedy (b. 1951)
 Stéphanie Nicot (b. 1952)
 Marleen S. Barr (b. 1953)
 Pat Murphy (b. 1955)
 Ellen Kushner (b. 1955)
 Montse Watkins (1955–2000)
 Joan Slonczewski (b. 1956)
 Mary Gentle (b. 1956)

Laura J. Mixon (b. 1957)
 Luce Basseterre [fr] (b. 1957)
 Rieko Matsuura (b. 1958)
 Ninni Holmqvist (b. 1958)
 Mari Kotani (b. 1958)
 Ïan Larue (b. 1958)
 Nicoletta Vallorani (b. 1958)
 Maureen F. McHugh (b. 1959)
 Lucie Chenu (b. 1960)
 Neil Gaiman (b. 1960)
 Melissa Scott (b. 1960)
 Nalo Hopkinson (b. 1960)
 Nicola Griffith (b. 1960)
 Gabriela Bustelo (b. 1962)
 Lola Robles (b. 1963)
 Hiroe Suga (b. 1963)
 Jo Walton (b. 1964)
 Heidrun Jänchen (b. 1964)
 Tananarive Due (b. 1966)
 Catherine Dufour (b. 1966)
 Ann Leckie (b. 1966)
 Virginia Bergin (b. 1966)
 Justine Larbalestier (b. 1967)
 Kelly Robson (b. 1967)
 Yumiko Shirai (b. 1967)
 Sara Doke (b. 1968)
 Annalee Newitz (b. 1969)
 Charlie Jane Anders (b. 1969)
 Lisa Yaszek (b. 1969)
 Barbara Kirchner [fr] (b. 1970)
 Kelly Sue DeConnick (b. 1970)
 Li-Cam (b. 1970)
 Fumi Yoshinaga (b. 1971)
 N. K. Jemisin (b. 1972)
 Sheree R. Thomas (b. 1972)
 Naomi Novik (b. 1973)
 Kiini Ibura Salaam (b. 1973)
 Sabrina Calvo (b. 1974)
 Juli Zeh (b. 1974)
  Nnedi Okorafor (b. 1974)
 Catherynne M. Valente (b. 1979)
 Kameron Hurley (b. 1980)
 Judith C. Vogt (b. 1981)
 Nghi Vo (b. 1981)
 Tang Fei (b. 1983)
 Amal El-Mohtar (b. 1984)
 Hao Jingfang (b. 1984)
 Theresa Hannig (b. 1984)
 Becky Chambers (b. 1985)
 Tamsyn Muir (b. 1985)
 Aline Valek (b. 1986)
 Akwaeke Emezi (b. 1987)
 Nadia Chonville (b. 1989)
 Floriane Soulas (b. 1989)
 Xiran Jay Zhao (b. 1997)
 Benjanun Sriduangkaew (b. ?)
 Vandana Singh (b. ?)

The Book of the City of Ladies (1405)

The Blazing World (1666)

The Voyages of Lord Seaton to the Seven Planets (1765)

Frankenstein (1818)
Man's Rights; Or, How Would You Like It? (1870)
Mizora (1880)
New Amazonia: A Foretaste of the Future (1889)
Iola Leroy (1892)
Unveiling a Parallel (1893)
Arqtiq (1899)

NEQUA or The Problem of the Ages (1900)
Sultana's Dream (1905)
Beatrice the Sixteenth (1909)
Moving the Mountain (1911)
Angel Island (1914)
Herland (1915)
"Shambleau" (1933)
"That Only a Mother" (1948)
A Wrinkle in Time (1962)
Memoirs of a Spacewoman (1962)
"When I Was Miss Dow" (1966)
"Aye, and Gomorrah" (1967)
The Left Hand of Darkness (1969)
And Chaos Died (1970)
The Kin of Ata Are Waiting for You (1971)
The Word for World is Forest (1972)
"When It Changed" (1972)
Ten Thousand Light-Years from Home (1973)
"The Women Men Don't See" (1973)
The Dispossessed (1974)
"The Girl Who Was Plugged In" (1974)
The Holdfast Chronicles (1974–1999)
The Female Man (1975)
Woman on the Edge of Time (1976)
Houston, Houston, Do You Read? (1976)
The Female Man (1977)
Egalia's Daughters (1977)
Up the Walls of the World (1978)
The Eye of the Heron (1978)
Star Songs of an Old Primate (1978)
Kindred (1979)
The Marriages Between Zones Three, Four and Five (1980)
The Vampire Tapestry (1980)
"Souls" (1982)
Native Tongue (1984)
The Handmaid's Tale (1985)
Brightness Falls from the Air (1985)
A Door into Ocean (1986)
Golden Days (1987)
Lilith's Brood (1987)
"Rachel in Love" (1987)
The Gate to Women's Country (1988)
Her Smoke Rose Up Forever (1990)
Beauty (1991)
He, She and It (1991)
Chroniques du pays des mères (1992)
"The Matter of Seggri" (1993)
Parable of the Sower (1993)
The Fifth Sacred Thing (1993)
Brown Girl in the Ring (1998)

The Fresco (2000)
Tales from Earthsea (2001)
Ōoku: The Inner Chambers (2004–2020)
Bu Bu Jing Xin (2005)
Fledgling (2005)
Le Goût de l'immortalité (2005)
Choir Boy (2005)
Wombs (2009–2016)
The Hundred Thousand Kingdoms (2010)
Who Fears Death (2010)
Lavinia (2008)
The Alchemy of Stone (2008)
The Method (2009)
"Six Months, Three Days" (2011)
Ancillary Justice (2013)
The Automation (2014)
The Fifth Season (2015)
Binti (2015)
The Obelisk Gate (2016)
All the Birds in the Sky (2018)
This Is How You Lose the Time War (2019)
The Empress of Salt and Fortune (2020)
When the Tiger Came Down the Mountain (2020)
The Future of Another Timeline (2021)
Victories Greater Than Death (2021)
Dreams Bigger Than Heartbreak (2022)
The Memory Librarian: And Other Stories of Dirty Computer (2022)
The Daughter of Doctor Moreau (2022)
Promises Stronger Than Darkness (2023)

Cyborg
Feminist science fiction
Gender in speculative fiction
Single-gender world
Women in speculative fiction
Láadan (1982)

Women of Wonder (1975)
Aurora: Beyond Equality (1976)
The Language of the Night (1979)
More Women of Wonder (1979)
How to Suppress Women's Writing (1983)
"A Cyborg Manifesto" (1984)
To Write Like a Woman (1995)
"We Have Always Fought" (2013)
The Geek Feminist Revolution (2016)
Dark Matter: A Century of Speculative Fiction from the African Diaspora (2000)

L'Oiselle (1909)
Jirel of Joiry (1934)

Aqueduct Press
Launch Point Press
Onlywomen Press
Regal Crest Enterprises
Zubaan Books

Forerunner
The Witch and the Chameleon
Janus
Bitch Planet

Sense of Gender Awards
Otherwise Award
Lambda Literary Award

Wiscon
Sad Puppies (2013–2017)

Bitcoin (abbreviation: BTC; sign: ₿) is the first decentralized cryptocurrency. Based on a free-market ideology, bitcoin was invented in 2008 when an unknown entity published a white paper under the pseudonym of Satoshi Nakamoto.[5] Use of bitcoin as a currency began in 2009,[6] with the release of its open-source implementation.[7]: ch. 1  In 2021, El Salvador adopted it as legal tender.[4] It is mostly seen as an investment and has been described by some scholars as an economic bubble.[8] As bitcoin is pseudonymous, its use by criminals has attracted the attention of regulators, leading to its ban by several countries as of 2021[update].[9]

Bitcoin works through the collaboration of computers, each of which acts as a node in the peer-to-peer bitcoin network. Each node maintains an independent copy of a public distributed ledger of transactions, called a blockchain, without central oversight. Transactions are validated through the use of cryptography, making it practically impossible for one person to spend another person's bitcoin, as long as the owner of the bitcoin keeps certain sensitive data secret.[7]: ch. 5

Consensus between nodes about the content of the blockchain is achieved using a computationally intensive process based on proof of work, called mining, which is typically performed by purpose-built computers called miners. These miners don't directly act as nodes, but do communicate with nodes. The mining process is primarily intended to prevent double-spending and get all nodes to agree on the content of the blockchain, but it also has desirable side-effects such as making it infeasible for adversaries to stifle valid transactions or alter the historical record of transactions, since doing so generally requires the adversary to have access to more mining power than the rest of the network combined.[7]: ch. 12  It is also used to regulate the rate at which new bitcoin is issued and enters circulation. Mining consumes large quantities of electricity and has been criticized for its environmental impact.[10]

History

Background

Before bitcoin, several digital cash technologies were released, starting with David Chaum's ecash in the 1980s.[11] The idea that solutions to computational puzzles could have some value was first proposed by cryptographers Cynthia Dwork and Moni Naor in 1992.[12][11] The concept was independently rediscovered by Adam Back who developed Hashcash, a proof-of-work scheme for spam control in 1997.[11] The first proposals for distributed digital scarcity-based cryptocurrencies came from cypherpunks Wei Dai (b-money) and Nick Szabo (bit gold) in 1998.[13] In 2004, Hal Finney developed the first currency based on reusable proof of work.[14] These various attempts were not successful:[11] Chaum's concept required centralized control and no banks wanted to sign on, Hashcash had no protection against double-spending, while b-money and bit gold were not resistant to Sybil attacks.[11]

2008–2009: Creation

The domain name bitcoin.org was registered on 18 August 2008.[15] On 31 October 2008, a link to a white paper authored by Satoshi Nakamoto titled Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System was posted to a cryptography mailing list.[16] Nakamoto's identity remains unknown.[5] According to computer scientist Arvind Narayanan, all individual components of bitcoin originated in earlier academic literature.[11] Nakamoto's innovation was their complex interplay resulting in the first decentralized, Sybil resistant, Byzantine fault tolerant digital cash system, that would eventually be referred to as the first blockchain.[11][17] Nakamoto's paper was not peer reviewed and was initially ignored by academics, who argued that it could not work.[11]

Nakamoto released bitcoin as open-source software.[citation needed] On 3 January 2009, the bitcoin network was created when Nakamoto mined the starting block of the chain, known as the genesis block.[18] Embedded in this block was the text "The Times 03/Jan/2009 Chancellor on brink of second bailout for banks", which is the date and headline of an issue of The Times newspaper.[6] Nine days later, Hal Finney received the first bitcoin transaction: ten bitcoins from Nakamoto.[19] Wei Dai and Nick Szabo were also early supporters.[18] On May 22, 2010, the first known commercial transaction using bitcoin occurred when programmer Laszlo Hanyecz bought two Papa John's pizzas for ₿10,000, in what would later be celebrated as "Bitcoin Pizza Day".[20]

2010–2012: Early growth

Blockchain analysts estimate that Nakamoto had mined about one million bitcoins[21] before disappearing in 2010 when he handed the network alert key and control of the code repository over to Gavin Andresen. Andresen later became lead developer at the Bitcoin Foundation,[22][23] an organization founded in September 2012 to promote bitcoin.[24]

After early "proof-of-concept" transactions, the first major users of bitcoin were black markets, such as the dark web Silk Road. During its 30 months of existence, beginning in February 2011, Silk Road exclusively accepted bitcoins as payment, transacting ₿9.9 million, worth about $214 million.[25]: 222

2013–2014: First regulatory actions

In March 2013, the US Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) established regulatory guidelines for "decentralized virtual currencies" such as bitcoin, classifying American bitcoin miners who sell their generated bitcoins as money services businesses, subject to registration and other legal obligations.[26] In May 2013, US authorities seized the unregistered exchange Mt. Gox.[27] In June 2013, the US Drug Enforcement Administration seized ₿11.02 from an individual attempting to use them to purchase illicit drugs. This marked the first time a government agency had seized bitcoins.[28] The FBI seized about ₿30,000 in October 2013 from Silk Road, following the arrest of its founder Ross Ulbricht.[29]

In December 2013, the People's Bank of China prohibited Chinese financial institutions from using bitcoin.[30] After the announcement, the value of bitcoin dropped,[31] and Baidu no longer accepted bitcoins for certain services.[32] Buying real-world goods with any virtual currency had been illegal in China since at least 2009.[33]

2015–2019

Research produced by the University of Cambridge estimated that in 2017, there were 2.9 to 5.8 million unique users using a cryptocurrency wallet, most of them using bitcoin.[34] In August 2017, the SegWit software upgrade was activated. Segwit was intended to support the Lightning Network as well as improve scalability.[35] SegWit opponents, who supported larger blocks as a scalability solution, forked to create Bitcoin Cash, one of many forks of bitcoin.[36]

In December 2017, the first futures on bitcoin was introduced by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME).[37]

In February 2018, the price crashed after China imposed a complete ban on bitcoin trading.[38] The percentage of bitcoin trading in the Chinese renminbi fell from over 90% in September 2017 to less than 1% in June 2018.[39] During the same year, bitcoin prices were negatively affected by several hacks or thefts from cryptocurrency exchanges.[40]

2020–present

In 2020, some major companies and institutions started to acquire bitcoin: MicroStrategy invested $250 million in bitcoin as a treasury reserve asset,[42] Square, Inc., $50 million,[43] and MassMutual, $100 million.[44] In November 2020, PayPal added support for bitcoin in the US.[45]

In February 2021, bitcoin's market capitalization reached $1 trillion for the first time.[46] In November 2021, the Taproot soft-fork upgrade was activated, adding support for Schnorr signatures, improved functionality of smart contracts and Lightning Network.[47] Before, bitcoin only used a custom elliptic curve with the ECDSA algorithm to produce signatures.[48]: 101  In September 2021, bitcoin became legal tender in El Salvador, alongside the US dollar.[4] In October 2021, the first bitcoin futures exchange-traded fund (ETF), called BITO, from ProShares was approved by the SEC and listed on the CME.[49]

In early 2022, during the Canadian trucker protests opposing COVID-19 vaccine mandates, organizers turned to bitcoin to receive donations after traditional financial platforms restricted access to funding.[50][51] Proponents highlighted bitcoin's use as a tool for fundraising in situations where access to conventional financial systems may be restricted.[52][53] In May and June 2022, the bitcoin price fell following the collapses of TerraUSD, a stablecoin,[54] and the Celsius Network, a cryptocurrency loan company.[55][56]

In 2023, ordinals—non-fungible tokens (NFTs)—on bitcoin, went live.[57] As of June 2023, River Financial estimated that bitcoin had 81.7 million users, about 1% of the global population.[58] In January 2024, the first 11 US spot bitcoin ETFs began trading, offering direct exposure to bitcoin for the first time on American stock exchanges.[59][60] In December 2024, bitcoin price reached $100,000 for the first time, as US president-elect Donald Trump promised to make the US the "crypto capital of the planet" and to stockpile bitcoin.[61] The same month, BlackRock, the world's largest asset manager, recommended investors to allocate up to 2% of their portfolio to bitcoin.[62]

In March 2025, President Trump signed an executive order to establish a strategic bitcoin reserve.[63]

Design

Units and divisibility

The unit of account of the bitcoin system is the bitcoin. It is most commonly represented with the symbol ₿[1] and the currency code BTC. However, the BTC code does not conform to ISO 4217 as BT is the country code of Bhutan,[64] and ISO 4217 requires the first letter used in global commodities to be 'X'.[64] XBT, a code that conforms to ISO 4217 though not officially part of it,[64] is used by Bloomberg L.P.[65]

No uniform capitalization convention exists; some sources use Bitcoin, capitalized, to refer to the technology and network, and bitcoin, lowercase, for the unit of account.[66] The Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary and the Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary use the capitalized and lowercase variants without distinction.[67][68]

One bitcoin is divisible to eight decimal places.[7]: ch. 5  Units for smaller amounts of bitcoin are the millibitcoin (mBTC), equal to 1⁄1000 bitcoin, and the satoshi[a] (sat), representing 1⁄100000000 (one hundred millionth) bitcoin, the smallest amount possible.[2] 100,000 satoshis are one mBTC.[69]

Blockchain

As a decentralized system, bitcoin operates without a central authority or single administrator,[70] so that anyone can create a new bitcoin address and transact without needing any approval.[7]: ch. 1  This is accomplished through a specialized distributed ledger called a blockchain that records bitcoin transactions.[71]

The blockchain is implemented as an ordered list of blocks. Each block contains a SHA-256 hash of the previous block,[71] chaining them in chronological order.[7]: ch. 7 [71] The blockchain is maintained by a peer-to-peer network.[25]: 215–219  Individual blocks, public addresses, and transactions within blocks are public information, and can be examined using a blockchain explorer.[72]

Nodes validate and broadcast transactions, each maintaining a copy of the blockchain for ownership verification.[73] A new block is created every 10 minutes on average, updating the blockchain across all nodes without central oversight. This process tracks bitcoin spending, ensuring each bitcoin is spent only once. Unlike a traditional ledger that tracks physical currency, bitcoins exist digitally as unspent outputs of transactions.[7]: ch. 5

Addresses and transactions

In the blockchain, bitcoins are linked to specific strings called addresses. Most often, an address encodes a hash of a single public key. Creating such an address involves generating a random private key and then computing the corresponding address. This process is almost instant, but the reverse (finding the private key for a given address) is nearly impossible.[7]: ch. 4  Publishing such a bitcoin address does not risk its private key, and it is extremely unlikely to accidentally generate a used key with funds. To use bitcoins, owners need their private key to digitally sign transactions, which are verified by the network using the public key, keeping the private key secret.[7]: ch. 5  An address may encode the hash of a bitcoin script that specifies more complex requirements to spend the funds. One common example is "multisig", in which multiple distinct private keys must mutually sign any transaction that attempts to spend the funds.[7]: ch. 7

Bitcoin transactions use a Forth-like scripting language,[7]: ch. 5  involving one or more inputs and outputs. When sending bitcoins, a user specifies the recipients' addresses and the amount for each output. This allows sending bitcoins to several recipients in a single transaction. To prevent double-spending, each input must refer to a previous unspent output in the blockchain.[74] Using multiple inputs is similar to using multiple coins in a cash transaction. As in a cash transaction, the sum of inputs can exceed the intended sum of payments. In such a case, an additional output can return the change back to the payer.[74] Unallocated input satoshis in the transaction become the transaction fee.[74]

Losing a private key means losing access to the bitcoins, with no other proof of ownership accepted by the protocol.[25] For instance, in 2013, a user lost ₿7,500, valued at US$7.5 million, by accidentally discarding a hard drive with the private key.[75] It is estimated that around 20% of all bitcoins are lost.[76] The private key must also be kept secret as its exposure, such as through a data breach, can lead to theft of the associated bitcoins.[7]: ch. 10 [77] As of December 2017[update], approximately ₿980,000 had been stolen from cryptocurrency exchanges.[78]

Mining

The mining process in bitcoin involves maintaining the blockchain through computer processing power. Miners group and broadcast new transactions into blocks, which are then verified by the network.[71] Each block must contain a proof of work (PoW) to be accepted,[71] involving finding a nonce number that, combined with the block content, produces a hash numerically smaller than the network's difficulty target.[7]: ch. 8  This PoW is simple to verify but hard to generate, requiring many attempts.[7]: ch. 8  PoW forms the basis of bitcoin's consensus mechanism.[79]

The difficulty of generating a block is deterministically adjusted based on the mining power on the network by changing the difficulty target, which is recalibrated every 2,016 blocks (approximately two weeks) to maintain an average time of ten minutes between new blocks. The process requires significant computational power and specialized hardware.[7]: ch. 8 [80]

Miners who successfully create a new block with a valid nonce can collect transaction fees from the included transactions and a fixed reward in bitcoins.[81] To claim this reward, a special transaction called a coinbase is included in the block, with the miner as the payee. All bitcoins in existence have been created through this type of transaction.[7]: ch. 8  This reward is halved every 210,000 blocks until ₿21 million[b] have been issued in total, which is expected to occur around the year 2140. Afterward, miners will only earn from transaction fees. These fees are determined by the transaction's size and the amount of data stored, measured in satoshis per byte.[82][74][7]: ch. 8

The proof of work system and the chaining of blocks make blockchain modifications very difficult, as altering one block requires changing all subsequent blocks. As more blocks are added, modifying older blocks becomes increasingly challenging.[83][71] In case of disagreement, nodes trust the longest chain, which required the greatest amount of effort to produce.[79] To tamper or censor the ledger, one needs to control the majority of the global hashrate.[79] The high cost required to reach this level of computational power secures the bitcoin blockchain.[79]

The environmental impact of bitcoin mining is controversial and has attracted the attention of regulators, leading to restrictions or incentives in various jurisdictions.[84] As of 2025[update], a non-peer-reviewed study by the Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance (CCAF) estimated that bitcoin mining represented 0.5% of global electricity consumption and 0.08% of world greenhouse gas emissions, comparable to Slovakia's emissions.[85] About half of the electricity used is generated through fossil fuels.[86] Moreover, mining hardware's short lifespan results in electronic waste.[87]

Privacy and fungibility

Bitcoin is pseudonymous, with funds linked to addresses, not real-world identities. While the owners of these addresses are not directly identified, all transactions are public on the blockchain. Patterns of use, like spending coins from multiple inputs, can hint at a common owner. Public data can sometimes be matched with known address owners.[88] Bitcoin exchanges might also need to collect personal data as per legal requirements.[89] For enhanced privacy, users can generate a new address for each transaction.[90]

In the bitcoin network, each bitcoin is treated equally, ensuring basic fungibility. However, users and applications can choose to differentiate between bitcoins. While wallets and software treat all bitcoins the same, each bitcoin's transaction history is recorded on the blockchain. This public record allows for chain analysis, where users can identify and potentially reject bitcoins from controversial sources.[91] For example, in 2012, Mt. Gox froze accounts containing bitcoins identified as stolen.[92]

Wallets

Bitcoin wallets were the first cryptocurrency wallets, enabling users to store the information necessary to transact bitcoins.[93][7]: ch. 1, glossary  The first wallet program, simply named Bitcoin, and sometimes referred to as the Satoshi client, was released in 2009 by Nakamoto as open-source software.[citation needed] Bitcoin Core is among the best known clients. Forks of Bitcoin Core exist such as Bitcoin Unlimited.[94] Wallets can be full clients, with a full copy of the blockchain to check the validity of mined blocks,[7]: ch. 1  or lightweight clients, just to send and receive transactions without a local copy of the entire blockchain.[95] Third-party internet services, called online wallets or hot wallets, store users' credentials on their servers, making them susceptible of hacks.[96] Cold storage protects bitcoins from such hacks by keeping private keys offline, either through specialized hardware wallets or paper printouts.[97][7]: ch. 4

Scalability and decentralization challenges

Nakamoto limited the block size to one megabyte.[98] The limited block size and frequency can lead to delayed processing of transactions, increased fees and a bitcoin scalability problem.[99] The Lightning Network, second-layer routing network, is a potential scaling solution.[7]: ch. 8

Research shows a trend towards centralization in bitcoin as miners join pools for stable income.[25]: 215, 219–222 [100]: 3  If a single miner or pool controls more than 50% of the hashing power, it would allow them to censor transactions and double-spend coins.[70] In 2014, mining pool Ghash.io reached 51% mining power, causing safety concerns, but later voluntarily capped its power at 39.99% for the benefit of the whole network.[101] A few entities also dominate other parts of the ecosystem such as the client software, online wallets, and simplified payment verification (SPV) clients.[70]

Economics and usage

Bitcoin's theoretical roots and ideology

According to the European Central Bank, the decentralization of money offered by bitcoin has its theoretical roots in the Austrian school of economics, especially with Friedrich Hayek's The Denationalisation of Money, in which he advocates a complete free market in the production, distribution and management of money to end the monopoly of central banks.[102]: 22  Sociologist Nigel Dodd argues that the essence of the bitcoin ideology is to remove money from social, as well as governmental, control.[103] The Economist describes bitcoin as "a techno-anarchist project to create an online version of cash, a way for people to transact without the possibility of interference from malicious governments or banks".[104] These philosophical ideas initially attracted libertarians and anarchists.[105] Economist Paul Krugman argues that cryptocurrencies like bitcoin are only used by bank skeptics and criminals.[106]

Recognition as a currency and legal status

vte

Money serves three purposes: a store of value, a medium of exchange, and a unit of account.[107] According to The Economist in 2014, bitcoin functions best as a medium of exchange.[107] In 2015, The Economist noted that bitcoins had three qualities useful in a currency: they are "hard to earn, limited in supply and easy to verify".[108] However, a 2018 assessment by The Economist stated that cryptocurrencies met none of these three criteria.[104] Per some researchers, as of 2015[update], bitcoin functions more as a payment system than as a currency.[25] In 2014, economist Robert J. Shiller wrote that bitcoin has potential as a unit of account for measuring the relative value of goods, as with Chile's Unidad de Fomento, but that "Bitcoin in its present form... doesn't really solve any sensible economic problem".[109] François R. Velde, Senior Economist at the Chicago Fed, described bitcoin as "an elegant solution to the problem of creating a digital currency".[110] David Andolfatto, Vice President at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, stated that bitcoin is a threat to the establishment, which he argues is a good thing for the Federal Reserve System and other central banks, because it prompts these institutions to operate sound policies.[111]

The legal status of bitcoin varies substantially from one jurisdiction to another. Because of its decentralized nature and its global presence, regulating bitcoin is difficult. However, the use of bitcoin can be criminalized, and shutting down exchanges and the peer-to-peer economy in a given country would constitute a de facto ban.[112] The use of bitcoin by criminals has attracted the attention of financial regulators, legislative bodies, and law enforcement.[113] Nobel-prize winning economist Joseph Stiglitz says that bitcoin's anonymity encourages money laundering and other crimes.[114] This is the main justification behind bitcoin bans.[9] As of November 2021[update], nine countries applied an absolute ban (Algeria, Bangladesh, China, Egypt, Iraq, Morocco, Nepal, Qatar, and Tunisia) while another 42 countries had an implicit ban.[115][needs update] Bitcoin is only legal tender in El Salvador.[4]

Use for payments

As of 2018[update], bitcoin is rarely used in transactions with merchants,[116] but it is popular to purchase illegal goods online.[117][118] Prices are not usually quoted in bitcoin and trades involve conversions into fiat currencies.[25] Commonly cited reasons for not using bitcoin include high costs, the inability to process chargebacks, high price volatility, long transaction times, and transaction fees (especially for small purchases).[116][119] Bloomberg reported that bitcoin was being used for large-item purchases on the site Overstock.com and for cross-border payments to freelancers.[120] As of 2015[update], there was little sign of bitcoin use in international remittances despite high fees charged by banks and Western Union who compete in this market.[25][121] Despite associated risks and costs, in 2022, a growing use of bitcoin, alongside cash and cards, was reported in restaurant business.[122]

In September 2021, the Bitcoin Law made bitcoin legal tender in El Salvador, alongside the US dollar.[4] The adoption has been criticized internationally and within El Salvador.[4][123] In 2022, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) urged El Salvador to reverse its decision.[124] As of 2022[update], the use of Bitcoin in El Salvador remains low: 80% of businesses refused to accept it.[125] In April 2022, the Central African Republic (CAR) adopted bitcoin as legal tender alongside the CFA franc,[126] but repealed the reform one year later.[127]

Bitcoin is also used by some governments. For instance, the Iranian government initially opposed cryptocurrencies, but later saw them as an opportunity to circumvent sanctions.[128] Since 2020, Iran has required local bitcoin miners to sell bitcoin to the Central Bank of Iran, allowing the central bank to use it for imports.[129] Some constituent states also accept tax payments in bitcoin, including Colorado (US)[130] and Zug (Switzerland).[131] As of 2023, the US government owned more than $5 billion worth of seized bitcoin.[132][133]

Use for investment and status as an economic bubble

As of 2018[update], the overwhelming majority of bitcoin transactions took place on cryptocurrency exchanges.[116] Since 2014, regulated bitcoin funds also allow exposure to the asset or to futures as an investment.[134][135] Bitcoin is used as a store of value:[136][137] individuals and companies such as the Winklevoss twins[138] and Elon Musk's companies SpaceX and Tesla have massively invested in bitcoin.[139][140] Bitcoin wealth is highly concentrated, with 0.01% holding 27% of in-circulation currency, as of 2021.[141] A 2024 survey from the Pew Research Center found that 17% of American adults have invested in, traded or used a cryptocurrency.[142]

As of September 2023[update], El Salvador had $76.5 million worth of bitcoin in its international reserves.[143]

In 2018, research published in the Journal of Monetary Economics concluded that price manipulation occurred during the Mt. Gox bitcoin theft and that the market remained vulnerable to manipulation.[144] Research published in The Journal of Finance also suggested that trading associated with increases in the amount of the Tether cryptocurrency and associated trading at the Bitfinex exchange accounted for about half of the price increase in bitcoin in late 2017.[145][146]

Bitcoin, along with other cryptocurrencies, has been described as an economic bubble by several economists, including Nobel Prize in Economics laureates, such as Joseph Stiglitz,[147] James Heckman,[8] and Paul Krugman.[106] Another recipient of the prize, Robert Shiller, argues that bitcoin is rather a fad that may become an asset class. He describes its price growth as an "epidemic", driven by contagious narratives.[148] In 2024, Jean Tirole, also Nobel laureate, described bitcoin as a "pure bubble" as its intrinsic value is zero. According to him, some bubbles are long-lasting such as gold and fiat currencies, and it's impossible to predict whether bitcoin will collapse like other financial bubbles or become the new gold.[149] The same year, Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell described bitcoin as a digital competitor to gold but not to the dollar as he argued it is a highly volatile speculative asset not used as a form of payment.[150]

According to research published in the International Review of Financial Analysis in 2018, bitcoin as an asset is highly volatile and does not behave like any other conventional asset.[151] According to one 2022 analysis published in The Journal of Alternative Investments, bitcoin was less volatile than oil, silver, US Treasuries, and 190 stocks in the S&P 500 during and after the 2020 stock market crash.[152] The term hodl was created in December 2013 for holding bitcoin rather than selling it during periods of volatility.[153][154]

Other economists, investors, and the central bank of Estonia have described bitcoin as a potential Ponzi scheme.[155][156][157] Legal scholar Eric Posner disagrees, however, as "a real Ponzi scheme takes fraud; bitcoin, by contrast, seems more like a collective delusion".[158] A 2014 World Bank report also concluded that bitcoin was not a deliberate Ponzi scheme.[159]

See also

Alternative currency
List of cryptocurrencies

Notes

^ a b Named after Satoshi Nakamoto

^ a b The exact number is ₿20,999,999.9769.[7]: ch. 8

References

^ a b "Unicode 10.0.0". Unicode Consortium. 20 June 2017. Archived from the original on 20 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.

^ a b Bradbury, Danny (November 2013). "The problem with Bitcoin". Computer Fraud & Security. 2013 (11): 5–8. doi:10.1016/S1361-3723(13)70101-5. ISSN 1361-3723. Archived from the original on 18 January 2023. Retrieved 25 November 2023.

^ "Bitcoin Core 29.0". 14 April 2025. Retrieved 14 April 2025.

^ a b c d e f "El Salvador's dangerous gamble on bitcoin". The editorial board. Financial Times. 7 September 2021. Archived from the original on 7 September 2021. Retrieved 7 September 2021.

^ a b S., L. (2 November 2015). "Who is Satoshi Nakamoto?". The Economist. Archived from the original on 22 November 2020. Retrieved 21 November 2023.

^ a b Davis, Joshua (10 October 2011). "The Crypto-Currency: Bitcoin and its mysterious inventor". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 1 November 2014. Retrieved 31 October 2014.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Antonopoulos, Andreas M. (2014). Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking Digital Crypto-Currencies. O'Reilly Media. ISBN 978-1-4493-7404-4.

^ a b Wolff-Mann, Ethan (27 April 2018). "'Only good for drug dealers': More Nobel prize winners snub bitcoin". Yahoo Finance. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 7 June 2018.

^ a b Sun Yin, Hao Hua; Langenheldt, Klaus; Harlev, Mikkel; Mukkamala, Raghava Rao; Vatrapu, Ravi (2 January 2019). "Regulating Cryptocurrencies: A Supervised Machine Learning Approach to De-Anonymizing the Bitcoin Blockchain". Journal of Management Information Systems. 36 (1): 65. doi:10.1080/07421222.2018.1550550. ISSN 0742-1222. S2CID 132398387. Archived from the original on 21 April 2024. Retrieved 29 November 2023.

^ Huang, Jon; O’Neill, Claire; Tabuchi, Hiroko (3 September 2021). "Bitcoin Uses More Electricity Than Many Countries. How Is That Possible?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 17 February 2023. Retrieved 26 October 2022.

^ a b c d e f g h Narayanan, Arvind; Clark, Jeremy (27 November 2017). "Bitcoin's academic pedigree". Communications of the ACM. 60 (12): 36–45. doi:10.1145/3132259. ISSN 0001-0782. S2CID 6425116. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ Dwork, Cynthia; Naor, Moni (1993), Brickell, Ernest F. (ed.), "Pricing via Processing or Combatting Junk Mail", Advances in Cryptology — CRYPTO’ 92, vol. 740, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 139–147, doi:10.1007/3-540-48071-4_10, ISBN 978-3-540-57340-1, retrieved 2 January 2025

^ Tschorsch, Florian; Scheuermann, Bjorn (2 March 2016). "Bitcoin and Beyond: A Technical Survey on Decentralized Digital Currencies". IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. 18 (3): 2084–2123. doi:10.1109/COMST.2016.2535718. ISSN 1553-877X. S2CID 5115101. Archived from the original on 19 November 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023.

^ Judmayer, Aljosha; Stifter, Nicholas; Krombholz, Katharina; Weippl, Edgar (2017). "History of Cryptographic Currencies". Blocks and Chains. Synthesis Lectures on Information Security, Privacy, and Trust. Springer. pp. 15–18. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-02352-1_3. ISBN 978-3-031-01224-2. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ Bernard, Zoë (2 December 2017). "Everything you need to know about Bitcoin, its mysterious origins, and the many alleged identities of its creator". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 15 June 2018. Retrieved 15 June 2018.

^ Finley, Klint (31 October 2018). "After 10 Years, Bitcoin Has Changed Everything—And Nothing". Wired. Archived from the original on 5 November 2018. Retrieved 9 November 2018.

^ Economist Staff (31 October 2015). "Blockchains: The great chain of being sure about things". The Economist. Archived from the original on 3 July 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2016.

^ a b Wallace, Benjamin (23 November 2011). "The Rise and Fall of Bitcoin". Wired. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 13 October 2012.

^ Popper, Nathaniel (30 August 2014). "Hal Finney, Cryptographer and Bitcoin Pioneer, Dies at 58". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 2 September 2014.

^ Cooper, Anderson (16 May 2019). "Meet the man who spent millions worth of bitcoin on pizza". CBS News. Archived from the original on 8 December 2021. Retrieved 8 December 2021.

^ McMillan, Robert. "Who Owns the World's Biggest Bitcoin Wallet? The FBI". Wired. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. Retrieved 7 October 2016.

^ Simonite, Tom (15 August 2014). "Meet Gavin Andresen, the most powerful person in the world of Bitcoin". MIT Technology Review. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ Odell, Matt (21 September 2015). "A Solution To Bitcoin's Governance Problem". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on 26 January 2016. Retrieved 24 January 2016.

^ Bustillos, Maria (1 April 2013). "The Bitcoin Boom". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 2 July 2018. Retrieved 30 July 2018.

^ a b c d e f g Rainer Böhme; Nicolas Christin; Benjamin Edelman; Tyler Moore (2015). "Bitcoin: Economics, Technology, and Governance". Journal of Economic Perspectives. 29 (2): 213–238. doi:10.1257/jep.29.2.213. ISSN 0895-3309.

^ Lee, Timothy B. (19 March 2013). "US regulator Bitcoin Exchanges Must Comply With Money Laundering Laws". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 28 July 2017.

^ Dillet, Romain. "Feds Seize Assets From Mt. Gox's Dwolla Account, Accuse It Of Violating Money Transfer Regulations". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on 9 October 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2013.

^ Sampson, Tim (2013). "U.S. government makes its first-ever Bitcoin seizure". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on 12 July 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2013.

^ Hill, Kashmir. "The FBI's Plan For The Millions Worth Of Bitcoins Seized From Silk Road". Forbes. Archived from the original on 2 May 2014.

^ Kelion, Leo (18 December 2013). "Bitcoin sinks after China restricts yuan exchanges". BBC News. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2013.

^ "China bans banks from bitcoin transactions". The Sydney Morning Herald. Reuters. 6 December 2013. Archived from the original on 23 March 2014. Retrieved 31 October 2014.

^ "Baidu Stops Accepting Bitcoins After China Ban". Bloomberg. New York. 7 December 2013. Archived from the original on 10 December 2013. Retrieved 11 December 2013.

^ "China bars use of virtual money for trading in real goods". English.mofcom.gov.cn. 29 June 2009. Archived from the original on 29 November 2013. Retrieved 10 January 2014.

^ Hileman, Garrick; Rauchs, Michel. "Global Cryptocurrency Benchmarking Study" (PDF). Cambridge University. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 April 2017. Retrieved 14 April 2017.

^ Vigna, Paul (21 July 2017). "Bitcoin Rallies Sharply After Vote Resolves Bitter Scaling Debate". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 21 November 2023. Retrieved 21 November 2023.

^ Selena Larson (1 August 2017). "Bitcoin split in two, here's what that means". CNN Tech. Cable News Network. Archived from the original on 27 February 2018. Retrieved 2 April 2018.

^ Cheng, Evelyn (17 December 2017). "Bitcoin debuts on the world's largest futures exchange, and prices fall slightly". CNBC. Archived from the original on 18 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024.

^ French, Sally (9 February 2017). "Here's proof that this bitcoin crash is far from the worst the cryptocurrency has seen". Market Watch. Archived from the original on 3 July 2018. Retrieved 3 July 2018.

^ "RMB Bitcoin trading falls below 1 pct of world total". Xinhuanet. Xinhua. 7 July 2018. Archived from the original on 10 July 2018. Retrieved 10 July 2018.

^ Chavez-Dreyfuss, Gertrude (3 July 2018). "Cryptocurrency exchange theft surges in first half of 2018: report". Reuters. Archived from the original on 4 July 2018. Retrieved 10 July 2018.

^ "Coinbase Bitcoin". Coinbase. Federal Reserve Economic Data. 4 December 2024. Retrieved 4 December 2024.

^ Cuthbertson, Anthony (13 September 2021). "MicroStrategy buys another $250m worth of bitcoin in hope of 100X price growth". The Independent. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ Oliver Effron. "Square just bought $50 million in bitcoin". CNN. Archived from the original on 24 October 2020. Retrieved 22 October 2020.

^ Olga Kharif (11 December 2020). "169-Year-Old MassMutual Invests $100 Million in Bitcoin". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 19 December 2020. Retrieved 26 December 2020.

^ "PayPal says all users in US can now buy, hold and sell cryptocurrencies". Techcrunch. 13 November 2020. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020.

^ Chavez-Dreyfuss, Gertrude; Wilson, Tom (19 February 2021). "Bitcoin hits $1 trillion market cap, surges to fresh all-time peak". Reuters. Retrieved 24 November 2023.

^ Sigalos, MacKenzie (14 November 2021). "Bitcoin's biggest upgrade in four years just happened – here's what changes". CNBC. Archived from the original on 14 November 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2021.

^ Van Hijfte, Stijn (2020). Blockchain Platforms: A Look at the Underbelly of Distributed Platforms. Morgan & Claypool Publishers. ISBN 978-1681738925.

^ Wursthorn, Michael (19 October 2021). "A Bitcoin ETF Is Here. What Does That Mean for Investors?". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 10 January 2024. Retrieved 11 January 2024.

^ Loh, Matthew. "Canada says it will freeze the bank accounts of 'Freedom Convoy' truckers who continue their anti-vaccine mandate blockades". Business Insider. Retrieved 19 January 2025.

^ "Crypto enthusiasts keep funding convoy protests as traditional banks take action against it - The Globe and Mail". The Globe and Mail. 8 December 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2025.

^ "Meet Greg Foss: A Former Bitcoin Fundraiser For Canada's 'Freedom Convoy' Protest". Forbes. 20 June 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2025.

^ "Elon Musk–backed 'freedom truckers' in Canada get Bitcoin lifeline after GoFundMe freezes millions in donations". Yahoo! Finance. 13 March 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2025.

^ Browne, Ryan (10 May 2022). "Bitcoin investors are panicking as a controversial crypto experiment unravels". CNBC. Archived from the original on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2022.

^ Milmo, Dan (18 June 2022). "Bitcoin value slumps below $20,000 in cryptocurrencies turmoil". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022.

^ Yaffe-Bellany, David (13 June 2022). "Celsius Network Leads Crypto Markets Into Another Free Fall". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 June 2022. Retrieved 14 June 2022.

^ Behrendt, Philipp (2023). "Taxation of the New Age: New Guidance for the World of Digital Assets". Journal of Tax Practice & Procedure. 25: 47. Archived from the original on 21 November 2023. Retrieved 21 November 2023.

^ "As banks buy up bitcoins, who else are the 'Bitcoin whales'?". BBC Home. 1 March 2024. Retrieved 14 March 2024.

^ Schmitt, Will (12 January 2024). "Bitcoin trading volumes surge after debut of long-awaited US ETFs". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 12 January 2024. Retrieved 12 January 2024.

^ Lang, Hannah (11 January 2024). "US bitcoin ETFs see $4.6B in volume in first day of trading". Reuters. Retrieved 12 January 2024.

^ "Bitcoin storms above $100,000 as Trump 2.0 fuels crypto euphoria". Reuters. 5 December 2024.

^ McGee, Suzanne (12 December 2024). "BlackRock recommends bitcoin portfolio weighting of up to 2% for interested investors". Reuters.

^ Bose, Nandita; Ward, Jasper (7 March 2025). "Trump signs order to establish strategic bitcoin reserve". Reuters. Washington. Retrieved 10 March 2025.

^ a b c Alexander, Carol; Imeraj, Arben (2019). "Introducing the BITIX: The Bitcoin Fear Gauge". SSRN Electronic Journal. doi:10.2139/ssrn.3383734. ISSN 1556-5068. XBT satisfies the norm 'ISO 4217' by the International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) as BTC goes against the name of Bhutan's currency. In general, transaction instruments that are not national currencies, like gold or silver, begin with an X. However, the symbol XBT is not officially recognised by ISO.

^ Romain Dillet (9 August 2013). "Bitcoin Ticker Available On Bloomberg Terminal For Employees". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on 1 November 2014. Retrieved 2 November 2014.

^ Bustillos, Maria (2 April 2013). "The Bitcoin Boom". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 27 July 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2013.

^ Bitcoin, Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary

^ bitcoin Archived 3 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary

^ Katie Pisa; Natasha Maguder (9 July 2014). "Bitcoin your way to a double espresso". CNN. Archived from the original on 18 June 2015. Retrieved 23 April 2015.

^ a b c Gervais, Arthur; Karame, Ghassan O.; Capkun, Vedran; Capkun, Srdjan (May 2014). "Is Bitcoin a Decentralized Currency?". IEEE Security & Privacy. 12 (3): 54–60. doi:10.1109/MSP.2014.49. ISSN 1540-7993. S2CID 13948781. Archived from the original on 19 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ a b c d e f "The great chain of being sure about things". The Economist. 31 October 2015. Archived from the original on 4 December 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ "Blockchain Networks: Token Design and Management Overview" (PDF). National Institute of Standards Technology (NIST). p. 32. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022.

^ Sparkes, Matthew (9 June 2014). "The coming digital anarchy". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 23 January 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015.

^ a b c d e Kroll, Joshua A.; Davey, Ian C.; Felten, E. (11–12 June 2013). The Economics of Bitcoin Mining, or Bitcoin in the Presence of Adversaries. The Twelfth Workshop on the Economics of Information Security (WEIS 2013). Washington, DC. S2CID 2794725.

^ "Man Throws Away 7,500 Bitcoins, Now Worth $7.5 Million". CBS DC. 29 November 2013. Archived from the original on 15 January 2014. Retrieved 23 January 2014.

^ Krause, Elliott (5 July 2018). "A Fifth of All Bitcoin Is Missing. These Crypto Hunters Can Help". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 8 July 2018.

^ Jeffries, Adrianne (19 December 2013). "How to steal Bitcoin in three easy steps". The Verge. Archived from the original on 27 July 2019. Retrieved 17 January 2014.

^ Harney, Alexandra; Stecklow, Steve (16 November 2017). "Twice burned – How Mt. Gox's bitcoin customers could lose again". Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 August 2019. Retrieved 6 September 2018.

^ a b c d Mingxiao, Du; Xiaofeng, Ma; Zhe, Zhang; Xiangwei, Wang; Qijun, Chen (5–8 October 2017). A review on consensus algorithm of blockchain. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC). Banff, AB, Canada: IEEE. pp. 2567–2572. doi:10.1109/SMC.2017.8123011. ISBN 978-1-5386-1645-1. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 29 November 2023.

^ "Bitcoin boom benefiting TSMC: report". Taipei Times. 4 January 2014. Archived from the original on 29 January 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2021.

^ Ashlee, Vance (14 November 2013). "2014 Outlook: Bitcoin Mining Chips, a High-Tech Arms Race". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on 21 November 2013. Retrieved 24 November 2013.

^ King, Ritchie S.; Williams, Sam; Yanofsky, David (17 December 2013). "By reading this article, you're mining bitcoins". Quartz. Archived from the original on 17 December 2013. Retrieved 17 December 2013.

^ Hampton, Nikolai (5 September 2016). "Understanding the blockchain hype: Why much of it is nothing more than snake oil and spin". Computerworld. Archived from the original on 6 September 2016. Retrieved 5 September 2016.

^ Stoll, Christian; Klaaßen, Lena; Gallersdörfer, Ulrich; Neumüller, Alexander (June 2023). Climate Impacts of Bitcoin Mining in the U.S. (Report). Working Paper Series. MIT Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research. Archived from the original on 18 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023.

^ "Cambridge Digital Mining Industry Report: Global Operations, Sentiment, and Energy Use - CCAF publications". Cambridge Judge Business School. Retrieved 29 April 2025.

^ Huang, Jon; O'Neill, Claire; Tabuchi, Hiroko (3 September 2021). "Bitcoin Uses More Electricity Than Many Countries. How Is That Possible?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 17 February 2023. Retrieved 16 January 2022.

^ de Vries, Alex; Stoll, Christian (December 2021). "Bitcoin's growing e-waste problem". Resources, Conservation and Recycling. 175: 105901. Bibcode:2021RCR...17505901D. doi:10.1016/j.resconrec.2021.105901. ISSN 0921-3449. S2CID 240585651. Archived from the original on 23 November 2021. Retrieved 24 November 2023.

^ Simonite, Tom (5 September 2013). "Mapping the Bitcoin Economy Could Reveal Users' Identities". MIT Technology Review. Archived from the original on 27 September 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2014.

^ Lee, Timothy (21 August 2013). "Five surprising facts about Bitcoin". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 9 July 2022. Retrieved 21 November 2023.

^ McMillan, Robert (6 June 2013). "How Bitcoin lets you spy on careless companies". Wired UK. Archived from the original on 9 February 2014. Retrieved 3 April 2020.

^ Anderson, Ross; Shumailov, Ilia; Ahmed, Mansoor (24 November 2018). "Making Bitcoin Legal". In Matyáš, Vashek; Švenda, Petr; Stajano, Frank; Christianson, Bruce (eds.). Security Protocols XXVI. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 11286. Springer. pp. 243–253. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-03251-7_29. ISBN 978-3-030-03250-0. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023.

^ Möser, Malte; Böhme, Rainer; Breuker, Dominic (2013). An Inquiry into Money Laundering Tools in the Bitcoin Ecosystem (PDF). 2013 APWG eCrime Researchers Summit. IEEE. ISBN 978-1-4799-1158-5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 June 2018. Retrieved 19 June 2019.

^ Serwer, Adam; Liebelson, Dana (10 April 2013). "Bitcoin, Explained". Mother Jones. Archived from the original on 27 April 2014. Retrieved 26 April 2014.

^ Vigna, Paul (17 January 2016). "Is Bitcoin Breaking Up?". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 20 August 2016. Retrieved 8 November 2016.

^ Gervais, Arthur; Capkun, Srdjan; Karame, Ghassan O.; Gruber, Damian (8 December 2014). "On the privacy provisions of Bloom filters in lightweight bitcoin clients". Proceedings of the 30th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference. ACSAC '14. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. pp. 326–335. doi:10.1145/2664243.2664267. ISBN 978-1-4503-3005-3. S2CID 9161497. Archived from the original on 21 April 2024. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ Barhydt, Bill (4 June 2014). "3 reasons Wall Street can't stay away from bitcoin". CNBC. Archived from the original on 4 December 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ Roberts, Daniel (15 December 2017). "How to send bitcoin to a hardware wallet". Yahoo Finance. Archived from the original on 17 February 2018. Retrieved 17 February 2018.

^ Mike Orcutt (19 May 2015). "Leaderless Bitcoin Struggles to Make Its Most Crucial Decision". MIT Technology Review. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. Retrieved 15 November 2016.

^ Orcutt, Mike (19 May 2015). "Leaderless Bitcoin Struggles to Make Its Most Crucial Decision". MIT Technology Review. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. Retrieved 22 June 2017.

^ Tschorsch, Florian; Scheuermann, Björn (2016). "Bitcoin and Beyond: A Technical Survey on Decentralized Digital Currencies". IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials. 18 (3): 2084–2123. doi:10.1109/comst.2016.2535718. S2CID 5115101.

^ Wilhelm, Alex. "Popular Bitcoin Mining Pool Promises To Restrict Its Compute Power To Prevent Feared '51%' Fiasco". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on 5 December 2017. Retrieved 25 January 2018.

^ European Central Bank (2012). Virtual Currency Schemes (PDF). European Central Bank. doi:10.2866/47380. ISBN 978-92-899-0862-7. OCLC 1044382974. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 November 2012.

^ Dodd, Nigel (May 2018). "The Social Life of Bitcoin" (PDF). Theory, Culture & Society. 35 (3): 35–56. doi:10.1177/0263276417746464. ISSN 0263-2764. S2CID 51914607. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ a b "Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies are useless". The Economist. 30 August 2018. Archived from the original on 4 September 2018. Retrieved 4 September 2018.

^ Feuer, Alan (14 December 2013). "The Bitcoin Ideology". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 July 2018. Retrieved 1 July 2018.

^ a b Mohamed, Theron (30 May 2023). "Nobel economist Paul Krugman slams crypto as mostly useless, after saying it's hugely overpriced and helps criminals". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 23 November 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023.

^ a b "Free Exchange. Money from nothing. Chronic deflation may keep Bitcoin from displacing its rivals". The Economist. 15 March 2014. Archived from the original on 25 March 2014. Retrieved 25 March 2014.

^ "The magic of mining". The Economist. 13 January 2015. Archived from the original on 12 January 2015. Retrieved 13 January 2015.

^ Shiller, Robert (1 March 2014). "In Search of a Stable Electronic Currency". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 24 October 2014.

^ Velde, François (December 2013). "Bitcoin: A primer" (PDF). Chicago Fed letter. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. p. 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 October 2014. Retrieved 3 September 2016.

^ Wile, Rob (6 April 2014). "St. Louis Fed Economist: Bitcoin Could Be A Good Threat To Central Banks". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 16 April 2014.

^ Weindling, Jacob (18 September 2017). "China May Be Gearing Up to Ban Bitcoin". Paste. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ Lavin, Tim (8 August 2013). "The SEC Shows Why Bitcoin Is Doomed". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 25 March 2014. Retrieved 20 October 2013.

^ Montag, Ali (9 July 2018). "Nobel-winning economist: Authorities will bring down 'hammer' on bitcoin". CNBC. Archived from the original on 11 July 2018. Retrieved 11 July 2018.

^ "Regulation of Cryptocurrency Around the World: November 2021 Update" (PDF). United States Library of Congress. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 December 2021. Retrieved 28 December 2022.

^ a b c Murphy, Hannah (8 June 2018). "Who really owns bitcoin now?". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 June 2018. Retrieved 10 June 2018.

^ "Monetarists Anonymous". The Economist. 29 September 2012. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ Ball, James (22 March 2013). "Silk Road: the online drug marketplace that officials seem powerless to stop". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 12 October 2013. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ Katz, Lily (12 July 2017). "Bitcoin Acceptance Among Retailers Is Low and Getting Lower". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 25 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018.

^ Kharif, Olga (1 August 2018). "Bitcoin's Use in Commerce Keeps Falling Even as Volatility Eases". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 2 August 2018. Retrieved 2 August 2018.

^ Chan, Bernice (16 January 2015). "Bitcoin transactions cut the cost of international money transfers". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 31 May 2019. Retrieved 31 May 2019.

^ Sheidlower, Noah (11 April 2022). "Bitcoin by bitcoin, restaurants start to accept cryptocurrencies". NBC News. Retrieved 7 October 2024.

^ "Majority of Salvadorans do not want bitcoin, poll shows". Reuters. 2 September 2021. Archived from the original on 30 November 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2021.

^ "IMF urges El Salvador to remove Bitcoin as legal tender". BBC News. 26 January 2022. Archived from the original on 26 January 2022. Retrieved 26 January 2022.

^ Alvarez, Fernando; Argente, David; Van Patten, Diana (2022). Are Cryptocurrencies Currencies? Bitcoin as Legal Tender in El Salvador (Report). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. doi:10.3386/w29968.

^ "Bitcoin Declared Legal Currency in Central African Republic". Bloomberg. 28 April 2022. Archived from the original on 28 April 2022. Retrieved 28 April 2022.

^ "Frequently Asked Questions on Central African Republic". International Monetary Fund. Archived from the original on 11 August 2023. Retrieved 11 August 2023.

^ Rasool, Mohammed (3 November 2020). "Iran Is Pivoting to Bitcoin". Vice. Archived from the original on 3 November 2020. Retrieved 10 November 2020.

^ "Iran: New Crypto Law Requires Selling Bitcoin Directly to Central Bank to Fund Imports". Asharq Al-Awsat. 31 October 2020. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 31 October 2020.

^ Kohler, Judith (21 September 2022). "Colorado accepts cryptocurrency to pay taxes, moving the state "tech forward"". The Denver Post. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022.

^ "'Crypto Valley' canton to accept Bitcoin for tax payments". SWI swissinfo. 3 September 2020. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ Huang, Vicky Ge (15 October 2023). "Why the U.S. Government Has $5 Billion in Bitcoin". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 20 February 2024. Retrieved 20 February 2024.

^ Castillo, Michael del (16 June 2023). "U.S. Government Owns Way More Bitcoin Than Any Other Country–So Why Aren't They Selling It?". Forbes. Archived from the original on 21 February 2024. Retrieved 21 February 2024.

^ "Jersey approve Bitcoin fund launch on island". BBC News. 10 July 2014. Archived from the original on 10 July 2014. Retrieved 10 July 2014.

^ "Chicago Mercantile Exchange jumps into bitcoin futures". CBS News. 18 December 2017. Archived from the original on 31 May 2019. Retrieved 31 May 2019.

^ "Gold or Bitcoin? Store-of-value debate rages as Bitcoin grows". Bloomberg Professional Services. 25 October 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2024.

^ "Goldman Sachs says bitcoin will compete with gold as "store of value"". Reuters. 5 January 2022.

^ Lee, Timothy B. "The $11 million in bitcoins the Winklevoss brothers bought is now worth $32 million". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 6 July 2017. Retrieved 11 August 2017.

^ Maidenberg, Micah; Driebusch, Corrie; Jin, Berber (17 August 2023). "A Rare Look Into the Finances of Elon Musk's Secretive SpaceX". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 August 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2023.

^ Ostroff, Caitlin; Elliott, Rebecca (8 February 2021). "Tesla Buys $1.5 Billion in Bitcoin". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 6 January 2024. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ Vigna, Paul (20 December 2021). "Bitcoin's 'One Percent' Controls Lion's Share of the Cryptocurrency's Wealth". Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. Retrieved 22 December 2021.

^ Faverio, Michelle; Dawson, Wyatt; Sidoti, Olivia (24 October 2024). "Majority of Americans aren't confident in the safety and reliability of cryptocurrency". Pew Research Center. Retrieved 8 March 2025.

^ Cota, Isabella (2 September 2023). "Two years of bitcoin in Bukele's El Salvador: An opaque experiment with a little-used currency". El País. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023.

^ Gandal, Neil; Hamrick, J.T.; Moore, Tyler; Oberman, Tali (May 2018). "Price manipulation in the Bitcoin ecosystem". Journal of Monetary Economics. 95: 86–96. doi:10.1016/j.jmoneco.2017.12.004. S2CID 26358036.

^ Griffin, John M.; Shams, Amin (August 2020). "Is Bitcoin Really Untethered?". The Journal of Finance. 75 (4): 1913–1964. doi:10.1111/jofi.12903. ISSN 0022-1082. S2CID 229576274.

^ Popper, Nathaniel (13 June 2018). "Bitcoin's Price Was Artificially Inflated Last Year, Researchers Say". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 13 June 2018.

^ Costelloe, Kevin (29 November 2017). "Bitcoin 'Ought to Be Outlawed,' Nobel Prize Winner Stiglitz Says". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 5 June 2018. It doesn't serve any socially useful function.

^ Authers, John (9 June 2021). "Don't Call Bitcoin a Bubble. It's an Epidemic". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021.

^ Tirole, Jean (1 February 2024). "Cryptocurrencies: an economist's view". La Jaune et la Rouge. Vol. February 2024, no. 792. Retrieved 15 November 2024.

^ "Bitcoin breaks $100,000 barrier amid post-election cryptocurrency surge". Washington Post. Retrieved 5 December 2024. "People use bitcoin as a speculative asset. It's like gold, it's just like gold, only it's virtual, it's digital. People are not using it as a form of payment or a store of value," he said. "It's highly volatile. It's not a competitor for the dollar; it's really a competitor for gold."

^ Klein, Tony; Pham Thu, Hien; Walther, Thomas (October 2018). "Bitcoin is not the New Gold – A comparison of volatility, correlation, and portfolio performance" (PDF). International Review of Financial Analysis. 59: 105–116. doi:10.1016/j.irfa.2018.07.010. S2CID 158400153. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023.

^ Mazur, Mieszko (31 March 2022). "Misperceptions of Bitcoin Volatility". The Journal of Alternative Investments. 24 (4): 33–44. doi:10.3905/jai.2022.1.153. ISSN 1520-3255. S2CID 247843794.

^ Montag, Ali (26 August 2018). "'HODL,' 'whale' and 5 other cryptocurrency slang terms explained". CNBC. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 16 March 2021.

^ Hajric, Vildana (19 November 2020). "All the Bitcoin Lingo You Need to Know as Crypto Heats Up". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 1 December 2020.

^ Clinch, Matt (10 March 2014). "Roubini launches stinging attack on bitcoin". CNBC. Archived from the original on 9 July 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ "This Billionaire Just Called Bitcoin a 'Pyramid Scheme'". Fortune. Archived from the original on 24 September 2017. Retrieved 23 September 2017.

^ Ott Ummelas; Milda Seputyte (31 January 2014). "Bitcoin 'Ponzi' Concern Sparks Warning From Estonia Bank". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 1 April 2014.

^ Posner, Eric (11 April 2013). "Fool's Gold". Slate. ISSN 1091-2339. Archived from the original on 8 July 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2023.

^ Davradakis, Emmanouil; Santos, Ricardo (2019). Blockchain, FinTechs and their relevance for international financial institutions. European Investment Bank. doi:10.2867/11329. ISBN 978-92-861-4184-3. Archived from the original on 21 April 2024. Retrieved 24 November 2023.

Further reading

Nakamoto, Satoshi (31 October 2008). "Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System" (PDF). bitcoin.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2014. Retrieved 28 April 2014.

vte

History
Economics
Politics
Legal status
Environmental effects

Gavin Andresen
Andreas Antonopoulos
Brian Armstrong
Adam Back
Wences Casares
Tim Draper
Hal Finney
Wei Dai
Mark Karpelès
Satoshi Nakamoto
Charlie Shrem
Nick Szabo
Vitalik Buterin
Ross Ulbricht
Roger Ver
Cody Wilson
Cameron Winklevoss
Tyler Winklevoss
Craig Wright
Dave Kleiman
Jihan Wu
Erik Voorhees

List of bitcoin companies
List of bitcoin forks
List of bitcoin organizations
List of people in blockchain technology

Bitcoin network
Blockchain
Cryptocurrency
Cryptocurrency wallet
Bitcoin ATM
ECDSA
Lightning Network
P2P
Proof of work
SegWit
SHA-2

Bitcoin Unlimited

Bitcoin Cash
Bitcoin Gold

Bitcoin scalability problem
History of bitcoin
2013 Bitcoin buried in Newport landfill
2018 cryptocurrency crash
2018 Bitcoin bomb threats
2020 Twitter account hijacking

The Rise and Rise of Bitcoin (2014 film)
Deep Web (2015 film)

Bitcoin Foundation
Bitcoin Magazine
BitGo
Bitmain
Canaan Creative
CoinDesk
GHash.io
Nuri
Strategy

Bitcoin Law
Bitcoin Beach
Bitcoin City

Category
 Commons

vte

Blockchain
Cryptocurrency tumbler
Cryptocurrency wallet
Cryptographic hash function
Decentralized exchange
Decentralized finance
Distributed ledger
Fork
Lightning Network
MetaMask
Non-fungible token
Smart contract
Web3

Proof of authority
Proof of space
Proof of stake
Proof of work

Bitcoin
Bitcoin Cash
Counterparty
LBRY
MazaCoin
Namecoin
Peercoin
Titcoin

Ethereum (1.0)
Ethereum Classic

Auroracoin
Bitconnect
Coinye
Dogecoin
Litecoin

Bitcoin Gold
Zcash

Monero

Dash
Petro

AmbaCoin
Firo
IOTA
Nervos Network
Primecoin
Verge
Vertcoin

Algorand
Avalanche
Cardano
EOS.IO
Ethereum (2.0)
Gridcoin
ICON
Injective
Kin
Nxt
Peercoin
Polkadot
Solana
Steem
Tezos
TON

Augur
Aventus
Basic Attention Token
Chainlink
Kin
KodakCoin
Minds
Polygon
Shiba Inu
The DAO
TRON

Dai
Diem
Pax
Terra
Tether
USD Coin

$Trump
Chia
Filecoin
HBAR (Hashgraph)
Helium
Luna
MobileCoin
Nano
NEO
SafeMoon
Stellar
WhopperCoin
XRP Ledger

BitConnect
Coinye
KodakCoin
OneCoin
Petro

Hyperledger
IQ.Wiki
Initiative Q

Airdrop
BitLicense
Blockchain game
Complementary currency
Crypto-anarchy
Cryptocurrency bubble
Cryptocurrency in Nigeria
Cryptocurrency scams
Digital currency
Decentralized autonomous organization
Decentralized application
Distributed ledger technology law
Double-spending
Environmental impact
Initial coin offering
Initial exchange offering
List of cryptocurrencies
Token money
Virtual currency

Category
 Commons
 List

vte

؋
฿
₵
₡
¢

$
₫
֏

€
ƒ
F
₲
₴
₭
₾
₼
₦

₱
£
元
﷼
៛

₽

ރ
₹
रू
𞱱
රු
૱
௹
꠸
Rs
₪
C
৳
₺
₸
₮
₩
¥
円

₳
Դր.
₢$
₰
₯
₠
₤
ℒ𝓈
₶
₥
ℳ
Pts
ℛℳ

₷

𐆚
𐆖
𐆙
𐆗
𐆘

₿

¤

FAST

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataCzech RepublicSpainIsrael

IdRef

Business and economics Free and open-source software Internet Numismatics Money

Media from CommonsQuotations from Wikiquote

Mineral physics
Petrophysics
History
Computational

Ionosphere
Polar wind
Thunderstorms

Atmospheric science
Magnetohydrodynamics
Oceanography
Turbulence

Earth's mantle
Exoplanetology
Geochemistry
Glaciology
Planetary science
Plate tectonics
Tectonics
Volcanism

Gravity of Earth
Geodesy
Geoid
Physical geodesy

Earth's magnetic field
Geomagnetic reversal
Magnetosphere
Paleomagnetism
Solar wind

Seismology
Spectroscopy
Vibration

Aki
Alfven
Anderson
Benioff
Bowie
Dziewonski
Forbes
Eotvos
Gilbert
Gutenberg
Heiskanen
Hotine
von Humboldt
Jeffreys
Kanamori
Love
Matthews
McKenzie
Mercalli
Molodenskii
Munk
Press
Richter
Turcotte
Van Allen
Vanicek
Vening Meinesz
Wegener
Wilson

vte

Mainshock
Foreshock
Aftershock
Blind thrust
Doublet
Interplate
Intraplate
Megathrust
Remotely triggered
Slow
Submarine
Supershear
Tsunami
Earthquake swarm

Fault movement
Volcanism
Induced seismicity

Epicenter
Epicentral distance
Hypocenter
Shadow zone
Seismic waves
P wave
S wave

Seismometer
Seismic magnitude scales
Seismic intensity scales

Coordinating Committee forEarthquake Prediction
Forecasting

Shear wave splitting
Adams–Williamson equation
Flinn–Engdahl regions
Earthquake engineering
Seismite
Seismology

Earth Sciences Portal

Category
Related topics

vte

An earthquake – also called a quake, tremor, or temblor – is the shaking of the Earth's surface resulting from a sudden release of energy in the lithosphere that creates seismic waves. Earthquakes can range in intensity, from those so weak they cannot be felt, to those violent enough to propel objects and people into the air, damage critical infrastructure, and wreak destruction across entire cities. The seismic activity of an area is the frequency, type, and size of earthquakes experienced over a particular time. The seismicity at a particular location in the Earth is the average rate of seismic energy release per unit volume.

In its most general sense, the word earthquake is used to describe any seismic event that generates seismic waves. Earthquakes can occur naturally or be induced by human activities, such as mining, fracking, and nuclear weapons testing. The initial point of rupture is called the hypocenter or focus, while the ground level directly above it is the epicenter. Earthquakes are primarily caused by geological faults, but also by volcanism, landslides, and other seismic events.

Significant historical earthquakes include the 1556 Shaanxi earthquake in China, with over 830,000 fatalities, and the 1960 Valdivia earthquake in Chile, the largest ever recorded at 9.5 magnitude. Earthquakes result in various effects, such as ground shaking and soil liquefaction, leading to significant damage and loss of life. When the epicenter of a large earthquake is located offshore, the seabed may be displaced sufficiently to cause a tsunami. Earthquakes can trigger landslides. Earthquakes' occurrence is influenced by tectonic movements along faults, including normal, reverse (thrust), and strike-slip faults, with energy release and rupture dynamics governed by the elastic-rebound theory.

Efforts to manage earthquake risks involve prediction, forecasting, and preparedness, including seismic retrofitting and earthquake engineering to design structures that withstand shaking. The cultural impact of earthquakes spans myths, religious beliefs, and modern media, reflecting their profound influence on human societies. Similar seismic phenomena, known as marsquakes and moonquakes, have been observed on other celestial bodies, indicating the universality of such events beyond Earth.

Terminology

An earthquake is the shaking of the surface of Earth resulting from a sudden release of energy in the lithosphere that creates seismic waves. Earthquakes may also be referred to as quakes, tremors, or temblors. The word tremor is also used for non-earthquake seismic rumbling.

In its most general sense, an earthquake is any seismic event—whether natural or caused by humans—that generates seismic waves. Earthquakes are caused mostly by the rupture of geological faults but also by other events such as volcanic activity, landslides, mine blasts, fracking and nuclear tests. An earthquake's point of initial rupture is called its hypocenter or focus. The epicenter is the point at ground level directly above the hypocenter.

The seismic activity of an area is the frequency, type, and size of earthquakes experienced over a particular time. The seismicity at a particular location in the Earth is the average rate of seismic energy release per unit volume.

Major examples

One of the most devastating earthquakes in recorded history was the 1556 Shaanxi earthquake, which occurred on 23 January 1556 in Shaanxi, China. More than 100,000 people died, with the region losing up to 830,000 people afterwards due to emmigration, plague, and famine.[2] Most houses in the area were yaodongs—dwellings carved out of loess hillsides—and many victims were killed when these structures collapsed. The 1976 Tangshan earthquake, which killed between 240,000 and 655,000 people, was the deadliest of the 20th century.[3]

The 1960 Chilean earthquake is the largest earthquake that has been measured on a seismograph, reaching 9.5 magnitude on 22 May 1960.[4][5] Its epicenter was near Cañete, Chile. The energy released was approximately twice that of the next most powerful earthquake, the Good Friday earthquake (27 March 1964), which was centered in Prince William Sound, Alaska.[6][7] The ten largest recorded earthquakes have all been megathrust earthquakes; however, of these ten, only the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake is simultaneously one of the deadliest earthquakes in history.

Earthquakes that caused the greatest loss of life, while powerful, were deadly because of their proximity to either heavily populated areas or the ocean, where earthquakes often create tsunamis that can devastate communities thousands of kilometers away. Regions most at risk for great loss of life include those where earthquakes are relatively rare but powerful, and poor regions with lax, unenforced, or nonexistent seismic building codes.

Occurrence

Tectonic earthquakes occur anywhere on the earth where there is sufficient stored elastic strain energy to drive fracture propagation along a fault plane. The sides of a fault move past each other smoothly and aseismically only if there are no irregularities or asperities along the fault surface that increases the frictional resistance. Most fault surfaces do have such asperities, which leads to a form of stick-slip behavior. Once the fault has locked, continued relative motion between the plates leads to increasing stress and, therefore, stored strain energy in the volume around the fault surface. This continues until the stress has risen sufficiently to break through the asperity, suddenly allowing sliding over the locked portion of the fault, releasing the stored energy.[8] This energy is released as a combination of radiated elastic strain seismic waves,[9] frictional heating of the fault surface, and cracking of the rock, thus causing an earthquake. This process of gradual build-up of strain and stress punctuated by occasional sudden earthquake failure is referred to as the elastic-rebound theory. It is estimated that only 10 percent or less of an earthquake's total energy is radiated as seismic energy. Most of the earthquake's energy is used to power the earthquake fracture growth or is converted into heat generated by friction. Therefore, earthquakes lower the Earth's available elastic potential energy and raise its temperature, though these changes are negligible compared to the conductive and convective flow of heat out from the Earth's deep interior.[10]

Fault types

There are three main types of fault, all of which may cause an interplate earthquake: normal, reverse (thrust), and strike-slip. Normal and reverse faulting are examples of dip-slip, where the displacement along the fault is in the direction of dip and where movement on them involves a vertical component. Many earthquakes are caused by movement on faults that have components of both dip-slip and strike-slip; this is known as oblique slip. The topmost, brittle part of the Earth's crust, and the cool slabs of the tectonic plates that are descending into the hot mantle, are the only parts of our planet that can store elastic energy and release it in fault ruptures. Rocks hotter than about 300 °C (572 °F) flow in response to stress; they do not rupture in earthquakes.[11][12] The maximum observed lengths of ruptures and mapped faults (which may break in a single rupture) are approximately 1,000 km (620 mi). Examples are the earthquakes in Alaska (1957), Chile (1960), and Sumatra (2004), all in subduction zones. The longest earthquake ruptures on strike-slip faults, like the San Andreas Fault (1857, 1906), the North Anatolian Fault in Turkey (1939), and the Denali Fault in Alaska (2002), are about half to one third as long as the lengths along subducting plate margins, and those along normal faults are even shorter.

Normal faults occur mainly in areas where the crust is being extended such as a divergent boundary. Earthquakes associated with normal faults are generally less than magnitude 7. Maximum magnitudes along many normal faults are even more limited because many of them are located along spreading centers, as in Iceland, where the thickness of the brittle layer is only about six kilometres (3.7 mi).[13][14]

Reverse faults occur in areas where the crust is being shortened such as at a convergent boundary. Reverse faults, particularly those along convergent boundaries, are associated with the most powerful earthquakes (called megathrust earthquakes) including almost all of those of magnitude 8 or more. Megathrust earthquakes are responsible for about 90% of the total seismic moment released worldwide.[15]

Strike-slip faults are steep structures where the two sides of the fault slip horizontally past each other; transform boundaries are a particular type of strike-slip fault. Strike-slip faults, particularly continental transforms, can produce major earthquakes up to about magnitude 8. Strike-slip faults tend to be oriented near vertically, resulting in an approximate width of 10 km (6.2 mi) within the brittle crust.[16] Thus, earthquakes with magnitudes much larger than 8 are not possible.

In addition, there exists a hierarchy of stress levels in the three fault types. Thrust faults are generated by the highest, strike-slip by intermediate, and normal faults by the lowest stress levels.[17] This can easily be understood by considering the direction of the greatest principal stress, the direction of the force that "pushes" the rock mass during the faulting. In the case of normal faults, the rock mass is pushed down in a vertical direction, thus the pushing force (greatest principal stress) equals the weight of the rock mass itself. In the case of thrusting, the rock mass "escapes" in the direction of the least principal stress, namely upward, lifting the rock mass, and thus, the overburden equals the least principal stress. Strike-slip faulting is intermediate between the other two types described above. This difference in stress regime in the three faulting environments can contribute to differences in stress drop during faulting, which contributes to differences in the radiated energy, regardless of fault dimensions.

Energy released

For every unit increase in seismic magnitude, there is a roughly thirty-fold increase in the energy released. For instance, an earthquake of magnitude 6.0 releases approximately 32 times as much energy as an earthquake of magnitude 5.0, and a 7.0 magnitude earthquake releases about 1,000 times as much energy as a 5.0 magnitude earthquake. An 8.6-magnitude earthquake releases the same amount of energy as 10,000 atomic bombs of the size used in World War II.[18]

This is so because the energy released in an earthquake, and thus its magnitude, is proportional to the area of the fault that ruptures[19] and the stress drop. Therefore, the greater the length and width of the faulted area, the greater the resulting magnitude. The most important parameter controlling the maximum earthquake magnitude on a fault, however, is not the maximum available length, but the available width because the latter varies by a factor of 20. Along converging plate margins, the dip angle of the rupture plane is very shallow, typically about 10 degrees.[20] Thus, the width of the plane within the top brittle crust of the Earth can reach 50–100 km (31–62 mi) (such as in Japan, 2011, or in Alaska, 1964), making the most powerful earthquakes possible.

Focus

The majority of tectonic earthquakes originate in the Ring of Fire at depths not exceeding tens of kilometers. Earthquakes occurring at depths less than 70 km (43 mi) are classified as "shallow-focus" earthquakes, while those with focal depths between 70 and 300 km (43 and 186 mi) are commonly termed "mid-focus" or "intermediate-depth" earthquakes. In subduction zones, where older and colder oceanic crust descends beneath another tectonic plate, deep-focus earthquakes may occur at much greater depths (ranging from 300 to 700 km (190 to 430 mi)).[21] These seismically active areas of subduction are known as Wadati–Benioff zones. Deep-focus earthquakes occur at depths where the subducted lithosphere should no longer be brittle, due to the high temperature and pressure. A possible mechanism for the generation of deep-focus earthquakes is faulting caused by olivine undergoing a phase transition into a spinel structure.[22]

Volcanic activity

Earthquakes often occur in volcanic regions and are caused there, both by tectonic faults and the movement of magma in volcanoes. Such earthquakes can serve as an early warning of volcanic eruptions, as during the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens.[23] Earthquake swarms can serve as markers for the location of the flowing magma throughout the volcanoes. These swarms can be recorded by seismometers and tiltmeters (a device that measures ground slope) and used as sensors to predict imminent or upcoming eruptions.[24]

Rupture dynamics

A tectonic earthquake begins as an area of initial slip on the fault surface that forms the focus. Once the rupture has been initiated, it begins to propagate away from the focus, spreading out along the fault surface. Lateral propagation will continue until either the rupture reaches a barrier, such as the end of a fault segment, or a region on the fault where there is insufficient stress to allow continued rupture. For larger earthquakes, the depth extent of rupture will be constrained downwards by the brittle-ductile transition zone and upwards by the ground surface. The mechanics of this process are poorly understood because it is difficult either to recreate such rapid movements in a laboratory or to record seismic waves close to a nucleation zone due to strong ground motion.[25]

In most cases, the rupture speed approaches, but does not exceed, the shear wave (S wave) velocity of the surrounding rock. There are a few exceptions to this:

Supershear earthquake ruptures are known to have propagated at speeds greater than the S wave velocity. These have so far all been observed during large strike-slip events. The unusually wide zone of damage caused by the 2001 Kunlun earthquake has been attributed to the effects of the sonic boom developed in such earthquakes.

Slow earthquake ruptures travel at unusually low velocities. A particularly dangerous form of slow earthquake is the tsunami earthquake, observed where the relatively low felt intensities, caused by the slow propagation speed of some great earthquakes, fail to alert the population of the neighboring coast, as in the 1896 Sanriku earthquake.[25]

During an earthquake, high temperatures can develop at the fault plane, increasing pore pressure and consequently vaporization of the groundwater already contained within the rock.[27][28][29] In the coseismic phase, such an increase can significantly affect slip evolution and speed, in the post-seismic phase it can control the Aftershock sequence because, after the main event, pore pressure increase slowly propagates into the surrounding fracture network.[30][29] From the point of view of the Mohr-Coulomb strength theory, an increase in fluid pressure reduces the normal stress acting on the fault plane that holds it in place, and fluids can exert a lubricating effect. As thermal overpressurization may provide positive feedback between slip and strength fall at the fault plane, a common opinion is that it may enhance the faulting process instability. After the mainshock, the pressure gradient between the fault plane and the neighboring rock causes a fluid flow that increases pore pressure in the surrounding fracture networks; such an increase may trigger new faulting processes by reactivating adjacent faults, giving rise to aftershocks.[30][29] Analogously, artificial pore pressure increase, by fluid injection in Earth's crust, may induce seismicity.

Tidal forces

Tides may trigger some seismicity.[31]

Clusters

Most earthquakes form part of a sequence, related to each other in terms of location and time.[32] Most earthquake clusters consist of small tremors that cause little to no damage, but there is a theory that earthquakes can recur in a regular pattern.[33] Earthquake clustering has been observed, for example, in Parkfield, California where a long-term research study is being conducted around the Parkfield earthquake cluster.[34]

An aftershock is an earthquake that occurs after a previous earthquake, the mainshock. Rapid changes of stress between rocks, and the stress from the original earthquake are the main causes of these aftershocks,[35] along with the crust around the ruptured fault plane as it adjusts to the effects of the mainshock.[32] An aftershock is in the same region as the main shock but always of a smaller magnitude, however, they can still be powerful enough to cause even more damage to buildings that were already previously damaged from the mainshock.[35] If an aftershock is larger than the mainshock, the aftershock is redesignated as the mainshock and the original main shock is redesignated as a foreshock. Aftershocks are formed as the crust around the displaced fault plane adjusts to the effects of the mainshock.[32]

Earthquake swarms are sequences of earthquakes striking in a specific area within a short period. They are different from earthquakes followed by a series of aftershocks by the fact that no single earthquake in the sequence is the main shock, so none has a notably higher magnitude than another. An example of an earthquake swarm is the 2004 activity at Yellowstone National Park.[36] In August 2012, a swarm of earthquakes shook Southern California's Imperial Valley, showing the most recorded activity in the area since the 1970s.[37]

Sometimes a series of earthquakes occur in what has been called an earthquake storm, where the earthquakes strike a fault in clusters, each triggered by the shaking or stress redistribution of the previous earthquakes. Similar to aftershocks but on adjacent segments of fault, these storms occur over the course of years, with some of the later earthquakes as damaging as the early ones. Such a pattern was observed in the sequence of about a dozen earthquakes that struck the North Anatolian Fault in Turkey in the 20th century and has been inferred for older anomalous clusters of large earthquakes in the Middle East.[38][39]

Frequency

It is estimated that around 500,000 earthquakes occur each year, detectable with current instrumentation. About 100,000 of these can be felt.[4][5] Minor earthquakes occur very frequently around the world in places like California and Alaska in the U.S., as well as in El Salvador, Mexico, Guatemala, Chile, Peru, Indonesia, the Philippines, Iran, Pakistan, the Azores in Portugal, Turkey, New Zealand, Greece, Italy, India, Nepal, and Japan.[41] Larger earthquakes occur less frequently, the relationship being exponential; for example, roughly ten times as many earthquakes larger than magnitude 4 occur than earthquakes larger than magnitude 5.[42] In the (low seismicity) United Kingdom, for example, it has been calculated that the average recurrences are:
an earthquake of 3.7–4.6 every year, an earthquake of 4.7–5.5 every 10 years, and an earthquake of 5.6 or larger every 100 years.[43] This is an example of the Gutenberg–Richter law.

The number of seismic stations has increased from about 350 in 1931 to many thousands today. As a result, many more earthquakes are reported than in the past, but this is because of the vast improvement in instrumentation, rather than an increase in the number of earthquakes. The United States Geological Survey (USGS) estimates that, since 1900, there have been an average of 18 major earthquakes (magnitude 7.0–7.9) and one great earthquake (magnitude 8.0 or greater) per year, and that this average has been relatively stable.[44] In recent years, the number of major earthquakes per year has decreased, though this is probably a statistical fluctuation rather than a systematic trend.[45] More detailed statistics on the size and frequency of earthquakes is available from the United States Geological Survey.[46] A recent increase in the number of major earthquakes has been noted, which could be explained by a cyclical pattern of periods of intense tectonic activity, interspersed with longer periods of low intensity. However, accurate recordings of earthquakes only began in the early 1900s, so it is too early to categorically state that this is the case.[47]

Most of the world's earthquakes (90%, and 81% of the largest) take place in the 40,000-kilometre-long (25,000 mi), horseshoe-shaped zone called the circum-Pacific seismic belt, known as the Pacific Ring of Fire, which for the most part bounds the Pacific plate.[48][49] Massive earthquakes tend to occur along other plate boundaries too, such as along the Himalayan Mountains.[50]

With the rapid growth of mega-cities such as Mexico City, Tokyo, and Tehran in areas of high seismic risk, some seismologists are warning that a single earthquake may claim the lives of up to three million people.[51]

Induced seismicity

While most earthquakes are caused by the movement of the Earth's tectonic plates, human activity can also produce earthquakes. Activities both above ground and below may change the stresses and strains on the crust, including building reservoirs, extracting resources such as coal or oil, and injecting fluids underground for waste disposal or fracking.[52] Most of these earthquakes have small magnitudes. The 5.7 magnitude 2011 Oklahoma earthquake is thought to have been caused by disposing wastewater from oil production into injection wells,[53] and studies point to the state's oil industry as the cause of other earthquakes in the past century.[54] A Columbia University paper suggested that the 8.0 magnitude 2008 Sichuan earthquake was induced by loading from the Zipingpu Dam,[55] though the link has not been conclusively proved.[56]

Measurement and location

The instrumental scales used to describe the size of an earthquake began with the Richter scale in the 1930s. It is a relatively simple measurement of an event's amplitude, and its use has become minimal in the 21st century. Seismic waves travel through the Earth's interior and can be recorded by seismometers at great distances. The surface-wave magnitude was developed in the 1950s as a means to measure remote earthquakes and to improve the accuracy for larger events. The moment magnitude scale not only measures the amplitude of the shock but also takes into account the seismic moment (total rupture area, average slip of the fault, and rigidity of the rock). The Japan Meteorological Agency seismic intensity scale, the Medvedev–Sponheuer–Karnik scale, and the Mercalli intensity scale are based on the observed effects and are related to the intensity of shaking.

Intensity and magnitude

The shaking of the earth is a common phenomenon that has been experienced by humans from the earliest of times. Before the development of strong-motion accelerometers, the intensity of a seismic event was estimated based on the observed effects. Magnitude and intensity are not directly related and calculated using different methods. The magnitude of an earthquake is a single value that describes the size of the earthquake at its source. Intensity is the measure of shaking at different locations around the earthquake. Intensity values vary from place to place, depending on the distance from the earthquake and the underlying rock or soil makeup.[57]

The first scale for measuring earthquake magnitudes was developed by Charles Francis Richter in 1935. Subsequent scales (seismic magnitude scales) have retained a key feature, where each unit represents a ten-fold difference in the amplitude of the ground shaking and a 32-fold difference in energy. Subsequent scales are also adjusted to have approximately the same numeric value within the limits of the scale.[58]

Although the mass media commonly reports earthquake magnitudes as "Richter magnitude" or "Richter scale", standard practice by most seismological authorities is to express an earthquake's strength on the moment magnitude scale, which is based on the actual energy released by an earthquake, the static seismic moment.[59][60]

Seismic waves

Every earthquake produces different types of seismic waves, which travel through rock with different velocities:

Longitudinal P waves (shock- or pressure waves)
Transverse S waves (both body waves)
Surface waves – (Rayleigh and Love waves)

Propagation velocity of the seismic waves through solid rock ranges from approx. 3 km/s (1.9 mi/s) up to 13 km/s (8.1 mi/s), depending on the density and elasticity of the medium. In the Earth's interior, the shock- or P waves travel much faster than the S waves (approx. relation 1.7:1). The differences in travel time from the epicenter to the observatory are a measure of the distance and can be used to image both sources of earthquakes and structures within the Earth. Also, the depth of the hypocenter can be computed roughly.

P wave speed

Upper crust soils and unconsolidated sediments: 2–3 km (1.2–1.9 mi) per second
Upper crust solid rock: 3–6 km (1.9–3.7 mi) per second
Lower crust: 6–7 km (3.7–4.3 mi) per second
Deep mantle: 13 km (8.1 mi) per second.

S waves speed

Light sediments: 2–3 km (1.2–1.9 mi) per second
Earths crust: 4–5 km (2.5–3.1 mi) per second
Deep mantle: 7 km (4.3 mi) per second

As a consequence, the first waves of a distant earthquake arrive at an observatory via the Earth's mantle.

On average, the kilometer distance to the earthquake is the number of seconds between the P- and S wave arrival times, multiplied by 8.[61] Slight deviations are caused by inhomogeneities of subsurface structure. By such analysis of seismograms, the Earth's core was located in 1913 by Beno Gutenberg.

S waves and later arriving surface waves do most of the damage compared to P waves. P waves squeeze and expand the material in the same direction they are traveling, whereas S waves shake the ground up and down and back and forth.[62]

Location and reporting

Earthquakes are not only categorized by their magnitude but also by the place where they occur. The world is divided into 754 Flinn–Engdahl regions (F-E regions), which are based on political and geographical boundaries as well as seismic activity. More active zones are divided into smaller F-E regions whereas less active zones belong to larger F-E regions.

Standard reporting of earthquakes includes its magnitude, date and time of occurrence, geographic coordinates of its epicenter, depth of the epicenter, geographical region, distances to population centers, location uncertainty, several parameters that are included in USGS earthquake reports (number of stations reporting, number of observations, etc.), and a unique event ID.[63]

Although relatively slow seismic waves have traditionally been used to detect earthquakes, scientists realized in 2016 that gravitational measurement could provide instantaneous detection of earthquakes, and confirmed this by analyzing gravitational records associated with the 2011 Tohoku-Oki ("Fukushima") earthquake.[64][65]

Effects

The effects of earthquakes include, but are not limited to, the following:

Shaking and ground rupture

Shaking and ground rupture are the main effects created by earthquakes, principally resulting in more or less severe damage to buildings and other rigid structures. The severity of the local effects depends on the complex combination of the earthquake magnitude, the distance from the epicenter, and the local geological and geomorphological conditions, which may amplify or reduce wave propagation.[66] The ground-shaking is measured by ground acceleration.

Specific local geological, geomorphological, and geostructural features can induce high levels of shaking on the ground surface even from low-intensity earthquakes. This effect is called site or local amplification. It is principally due to the transfer of the seismic motion from hard deep soils to soft superficial soils and the effects of seismic energy focalization owing to the typical geometrical setting of such deposits.

Ground rupture is a visible breaking and displacement of the Earth's surface along the trace of the fault, which may be of the order of several meters in the case of major earthquakes. Ground rupture is a major risk for large engineering structures such as dams, bridges, and nuclear power stations and requires careful mapping of existing faults to identify any that are likely to break the ground surface within the life of the structure.[67]

Soil liquefaction

Soil liquefaction occurs when, because of the shaking, water-saturated granular material (such as sand) temporarily loses its strength and transforms from a solid to a liquid. Soil liquefaction may cause rigid structures, like buildings and bridges, to tilt or sink into the liquefied deposits. For example, in the 1964 Alaska earthquake, soil liquefaction caused many buildings to sink into the ground, eventually collapsing upon themselves.[68]

Human impacts

Physical damage from an earthquake will vary depending on the intensity of shaking in a given area and the type of population.  Underserved and developing communities frequently experience more severe impacts (and longer lasting) from a seismic event compared to well-developed communities.[69] Impacts may include:

Injuries and loss of life
Damage to critical infrastructure (short and long-term)
Roads, bridges, and public transportation networks
Water, power, sewer and gas interruption
Communication systems
Loss of critical community services including hospitals, police, and fire
General property damage
Collapse or destabilization (potentially leading to future collapse) of buildings

Roads, bridges, and public transportation networks
Water, power, sewer and gas interruption
Communication systems

With these impacts and others, the aftermath may bring disease, a lack of basic necessities, mental consequences such as panic attacks and depression to survivors,[70] and higher insurance premiums. Recovery times will vary based on the level of damage and the socioeconomic status of the impacted community.

Landslides

China stood out in several categories in a study group of 162 earthquakes (from 1772 to 2021) that included landslide fatalities. Due to the 2008 Sichuan earthquake, it had 42% of all landslide fatalities within the study (total event deaths were higher). They were followed by Peru (22%) from the 1970 Ancash earthquake, and Pakistan (21%) from the 2005 Kashmir earthquake. China was also on top with the highest area affected by landslides with more than 80,000 km2, followed by Canada with 66,000 km2 (1988 Saguenay and 1946 Vancouver Island). Strike-slip (61 events) was the dominant fault type listed, followed closely by thrust/reverse (57), and normal (33).[71]

Fires

Earthquakes can cause fires by damaging electrical power or gas lines. In the event of water mains rupturing and a loss of pressure, it may also become difficult to stop the spread of a fire once it has started. For example, more deaths in the 1906 San Francisco earthquake were caused by fire than by the earthquake itself.[72]

Tsunami

Tsunamis are long-wavelength, long-period sea waves produced by the sudden or abrupt movement of large volumes of water—including when an earthquake occurs at sea. In the open ocean, the distance between wave crests can surpass 100 kilometres (62 mi), and the wave periods can vary from five minutes to one hour. Such tsunamis travel 600–800 kilometers per hour (373–497 miles per hour), depending on water depth. Large waves produced by an earthquake or a submarine landslide can overrun nearby coastal areas in a matter of minutes. Tsunamis can also travel thousands of kilometers across open ocean and wreak destruction on far shores hours after the earthquake that generated them.[73]

Ordinarily, subduction earthquakes under magnitude 7.5 do not cause tsunamis, although some instances of this have been recorded. Most destructive tsunamis are caused by earthquakes of magnitude 7.5 or more.[73]

Floods

Floods may be secondary effects of earthquakes if dams are damaged. Earthquakes may cause landslips to dam rivers, which collapse and cause floods.[74]

The terrain below the Sarez Lake in Tajikistan is in danger of catastrophic flooding if the landslide dam formed by the earthquake, known as the Usoi Dam, were to fail during a future earthquake. Impact projections suggest the flood could affect roughly five million people.[75]

Management

Prediction

Earthquake prediction is a branch of the science of seismology concerned with the specification of the time, location, and magnitude of future earthquakes within stated limits.[76] Many methods have been developed for predicting the time and place in which earthquakes will occur. Despite considerable research efforts by seismologists, scientifically reproducible predictions cannot yet be made to a specific day or month.[77] Popular belief holds earthquakes are preceded by earthquake weather, in the early morning.[78][79]

Forecasting

While forecasting is usually considered to be a type of prediction, earthquake forecasting is often differentiated from earthquake prediction. Earthquake forecasting is concerned with the probabilistic assessment of general earthquake hazards, including the frequency and magnitude of damaging earthquakes in a given area over years or decades.[80] For well-understood faults the probability that a segment may rupture during the next few decades can be estimated.[81][82]

Earthquake warning systems have been developed that can provide regional notification of an earthquake in progress, but before the ground surface has begun to move, potentially allowing people within the system's range to seek shelter before the earthquake's impact is felt.

Preparedness

The objective of earthquake engineering is to foresee the impact of earthquakes on buildings, bridges, tunnels, roadways, and other structures, and to design such structures to minimize the risk of damage. Existing structures can be modified by seismic retrofitting to improve their resistance to earthquakes. Earthquake insurance can provide building owners with financial protection against losses resulting from earthquakes. Emergency management strategies can be employed by a government or organization to mitigate risks and prepare for consequences.

Artificial intelligence may help to assess buildings and plan precautionary operations. The Igor expert system is part of a mobile laboratory that supports the procedures leading to the seismic assessment of masonry buildings and the planning of retrofitting operations on them. It has been applied to assess buildings in Lisbon, Rhodes, and Naples.[83]

Individuals can also take preparedness steps like securing water heaters and heavy items that could injure someone, locating shutoffs for utilities, and being educated about what to do when the shaking starts. For areas near large bodies of water, earthquake preparedness encompasses the possibility of a tsunami caused by a large earthquake.

In culture

Historical views

From the lifetime of the Greek philosopher Anaxagoras in the 5th century BCE to the 14th century CE, earthquakes were usually attributed to "air (vapors) in the cavities of the Earth."[84] Thales of Miletus (625–547 BCE) was the only documented person who believed that earthquakes were caused by tension between the earth and water.[84] Other theories existed, including the Greek philosopher Anaxamines' (585–526 BCE) beliefs that short incline episodes of dryness and wetness caused seismic activity. The Greek philosopher Democritus (460–371 BCE) blamed water in general for earthquakes.[84] Pliny the Elder called earthquakes "underground thunderstorms".[84]

Mythology and religion

In Norse mythology, earthquakes were explained as the violent struggle of the god Loki. When Loki, god of mischief and strife, murdered Baldr, god of beauty and light, he was punished by being bound in a cave with a poisonous serpent placed above his head dripping venom. Loki's wife Sigyn stood by him with a bowl to catch the poison, but whenever she had to empty the bowl, the poison dripped on Loki's face, forcing him to jerk his head away and thrash against his bonds, which caused the earth to tremble.[85]

In Greek mythology, Poseidon was the cause and god of earthquakes. When he was in a bad mood, he struck the ground with a trident, causing earthquakes and other calamities. He also used earthquakes to punish and inflict fear upon people as revenge.[86]

In Japanese mythology, Namazu (鯰) is a giant catfish who causes earthquakes. Namazu lives in the mud beneath the earth and is guarded by the god Kashima, who restrains the fish with a stone. When Kashima lets his guard fall, Namazu thrashes about, causing violent earthquakes.[87]

In Taiwanese folklore, the Tē-gû (地牛)  is a giant earth buffalo who causes earthquakes.[88]

In the New Testament, Matthew's Gospel refers to earthquakes occurring both after the death of Jesus (Matthew 27:51, 54) and at his resurrection (Matthew 28:2).[89] Earthquakes form part of the picture through which Jesus portrays the beginning of the end of time.[90]

In popular culture

In modern popular culture, the portrayal of earthquakes is shaped by the memory of great cities laid waste, such as Kobe in 1995 or San Francisco in 1906.[91] Fictional earthquakes tend to strike suddenly and without warning.[91] For this reason, stories about earthquakes generally begin with the disaster and focus on its immediate aftermath, as in Short Walk to Daylight (1972), The Ragged Edge (1968) or Aftershock: Earthquake in New York (1999).[91] A notable example is Heinrich von Kleist's classic novella, The Earthquake in Chile, which describes the destruction of Santiago in 1647. Haruki Murakami's short fiction collection After the Quake depicts the consequences of the Kobe earthquake of 1995.

The most popular single earthquake in fiction is the hypothetical "Big One" expected of California's San Andreas Fault someday, as depicted in the novels Richter 10 (1996), Goodbye California (1977), 2012 (2009), and San Andreas (2015), among other works.[91] Jacob M. Appel's widely anthologized short story, A Comparative Seismology, features a con artist who convinces an elderly woman that an apocalyptic earthquake is imminent.[92]

Contemporary depictions of earthquakes in film are variable in the manner in which they reflect human psychological reactions to the actual trauma that can be caused to directly afflicted families and their loved ones.[93] Disaster mental health response research emphasizes the need to be aware of the different roles of loss of family and key community members, loss of home and familiar surroundings, and loss of essential supplies and services to maintain survival.[94][95] Particularly for children, the clear availability of caregiving adults who can protect, nourish, and clothe them in the aftermath of the earthquake and help them make sense of what has befallen them is more important to their emotional and physical health than the simple giving of provisions.[96] As was observed after other disasters involving destruction and loss of life and their media depictions, recently observed in the 2010 Haiti earthquake, it is also believed to be important not to pathologize the reactions to loss and displacement or disruption of governmental administration and services, but rather to validate the reactions to support constructive problem-solving and reflection.[97]

Outside of Earth

Phenomena similar to earthquakes have been observed on other planets (e.g., marsquakes on Mars) and on the Moon (e.g., moonquakes).

See also

Alpide belt – Belt of Eurasian mountain ranges
European-Mediterranean Seismological Centre (EMSC), also known as Centre Sismologique Euro-Méditerranéen
Helioseismology – Study of the structure and dynamics of the Sun through its oscillation
Injection well – Device that places fluid deep underground
IRIS Consortium – university research consortium dedicated to exploring the Earth's interior through the collection and distribution of seismographic dataPages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback
Lists of earthquakes
Seismological Society of America (SSA) – International scientific society
Seismotectonics – study of how tectonic faults influence earthquakesPages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback
Vertical displacement – Vertical shift of land in plate tectonics

References

^ "USGS: Magnitude 8 and Greater Earthquakes Since 1900". Archived from the original on April 14, 2016.

^ "Earthquakes with 50,000 or More Deaths". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on November 1, 2009.

^ Spignesi, Stephen J. (2005). Catastrophe!: The 100 Greatest Disasters of All Time. ISBN 0-8065-2558-4

^ a b "Cool Earthquake Facts". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2021-04-20. Retrieved 2021-04-21.

^ a b Pressler, Margaret Webb (14 April 2010). "More earthquakes than usual? Not really". KidsPost. The Washington Post. pp. C10.

^ Kanamori Hiroo. "The Energy Release in Great Earthquakes" (PDF). Journal of Geophysical Research. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-07-23. Retrieved 2010-10-10.

^ "How Much Bigger?". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2011-06-07. Retrieved 2010-10-10.

^ Ohnaka, M. (2013). The Physics of Rock Failure and Earthquakes. Cambridge University Press. p. 148. ISBN 978-1-107-35533-0.

^ Vassiliou, Marius; Kanamori, Hiroo (1982). "The Energy Release in Earthquakes". Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 72: 371–387.

^ Spence, William; S.A. Sipkin; G.L. Choy (1989). "Measuring the Size of an Earthquake". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2009-09-01. Retrieved 2006-11-03.

^ Sibson, R.H. (1982). "Fault Zone Models, Heat Flow, and the Depth Distribution of Earthquakes in the Continental Crust of the United States". Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America. 72 (1): 151–163.

^ Sibson, R.H. (2002) "Geology of the crustal earthquake source" International handbook of earthquake and engineering seismology, Volume 1, Part 1, p. 455, eds. W H K Lee, H Kanamori, P C Jennings, and C. Kisslinger, Academic Press, ISBN 978-0-12-440652-0

^ Hjaltadóttir S., 2010, "Use of relatively located microearthquakes to map fault patterns and estimate the thickness of the brittle crust in Southwest Iceland"

^ "Reports and publications | Seismicity | Icelandic Meteorological office". En.vedur.is. Archived from the original on 2008-04-14. Retrieved 2011-07-24.

^ Stern, Robert J. (2002), "Subduction zones", Reviews of Geophysics, 40 (4): 17, Bibcode:2002RvGeo..40.1012S, doi:10.1029/2001RG000108, S2CID 247695067

^ "Instrumental California Earthquake Catalog". WGCEP. Archived from the original on 2011-07-25. Retrieved 2011-07-24.

^ Schorlemmer, D.; Wiemer, S.; Wyss, M. (2005). "Variations in earthquake-size distribution across different stress regimes". Nature. 437 (7058): 539–542. Bibcode:2005Natur.437..539S. doi:10.1038/nature04094. PMID 16177788. S2CID 4327471.

^ Geoscience Australia.[full citation needed]

^ Wyss, M. (1979). "Estimating expectable maximum magnitude of earthquakes from fault dimensions". Geology. 7 (7): 336–340. Bibcode:1979Geo.....7..336W. doi:10.1130/0091-7613(1979)7<336:EMEMOE>2.0.CO;2.

^ "Global Centroid Moment Tensor Catalog". Globalcmt.org. Archived from the original on 2011-07-19. Retrieved 2011-07-24.

^ "M7.5 Northern Peru Earthquake of 26 September 2005" (PDF). National Earthquake Information Center. 17 October 2005. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 2008-08-01.

^ Greene II, H.W.; Burnley, P.C. (October 26, 1989). "A new self-organizing mechanism for deep-focus earthquakes". Nature. 341 (6244): 733–737. Bibcode:1989Natur.341..733G. doi:10.1038/341733a0. S2CID 4287597.

^ Foxworthy and Hill (1982). Volcanic Eruptions of 1980 at Mount St. Helens, The First 100 Days: USGS Professional Paper 1249.

^ Watson, John; Watson, Kathie (January 7, 1998). "Volcanoes and Earthquakes". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on March 26, 2009. Retrieved May 9, 2009.

^ a b National Research Council (U.S.). Committee on the Science of Earthquakes (2003). "5. Earthquake Physics and Fault-System Science". Living on an Active Earth: Perspectives on Earthquake Science. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. p. 418. ISBN 978-0-309-06562-7. Retrieved 8 July 2010.

^ Melgar, Diego; Taymaz, Tuncay; Ganas, Athanassios; Crowell, Brendan; Öcalan, Taylan; Kahraman, Metin; Tsironi, Varvara; Yolsal-Çevikbilen, Seda; Valkaniotis, Sotiris; Irmak, Tahir Serkan; Eken, Tuna; Erman, Ceyhun; Özkan, Berkan; Dogan, Ali Hasan; Altuntaş, Cemali (2023). "Sub- and super-shear ruptures during the 2023 Mw 7.8 and Mw 7.6 earthquake doublet in SE Türkiye". Seismica. 2 (3): 387. Bibcode:2023Seism...2..387M. doi:10.26443/seismica.v2i3.387. S2CID 257520761.

^ Sibson, R.H. (1973). "Interactions between Temperature and Pore-Fluid Pressure during Earthquake Faulting and a Mechanism for Partial or Total Stress Relief". Nat. Phys. Sci. 243 (126): 66–68. Bibcode:1973NPhS..243...66S. doi:10.1038/physci243066a0.

^ Rudnicki, J.W.; Rice, J.R. (2006). "Effective normal stress alteration due to pore pressure changes induced by dynamic slip propagation on a plane between dissimilar materials" (PDF). J. Geophys. Res. 111, B10308 (B10). Bibcode:2006JGRB..11110308R. doi:10.1029/2006JB004396. S2CID 1333820. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2019-05-02.

^ a b c Guerriero, V; Mazzoli, S. (2021). "Theory of Effective Stress in Soil and Rock and Implications for Fracturing Processes: A Review". Geosciences. 11 (3): 119. Bibcode:2021Geosc..11..119G. doi:10.3390/geosciences11030119.

^ a b Nur, A; Booker, J.R. (1972). "Aftershocks Caused by Pore Fluid Flow?". Science. 175 (4024): 885–887. Bibcode:1972Sci...175..885N. doi:10.1126/science.175.4024.885. PMID 17781062. S2CID 19354081.

^ Hartzell, Stephen; Heaton, Thomas (1990-04-01). "The fortnightly tide and the tidal triggering of earthquakes" (PDF). Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America. 80 (2): 504–505. Bibcode:1990BuSSA..80..504H. doi:10.1785/BSSA0800020504. ISSN 1943-3573.

^ a b c "What are Aftershocks, Foreshocks, and Earthquake Clusters?". Archived from the original on 2009-05-11.

^ "Repeating Earthquakes". United States Geological Survey. January 29, 2009. Archived from the original on April 3, 2009. Retrieved May 11, 2009.

^ "The Parkfield, California, Earthquake Experiment". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2022-10-24. Retrieved 2022-10-24.

^ a b "Aftershock | geology". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 2015-08-23. Retrieved 2021-10-13.

^ "Earthquake Swarms at Yellowstone". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2008-05-13. Retrieved 2008-09-15.

^ Duke, Alan. "Quake 'swarm' shakes Southern California". CNN. Archived from the original on 27 August 2012. Retrieved 27 August 2012.

^ Amos Nur; Cline, Eric H. (2000). "Poseidon's Horses: Plate Tectonics and Earthquake Storms in the Late Bronze Age Aegean and Eastern Mediterranean" (PDF). Journal of Archaeological Science. 27 (1): 43–63. Bibcode:2000JArSc..27...43N. doi:10.1006/jasc.1999.0431. ISSN 0305-4403. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-03-25.

^ "Earthquake Storms". Horizon. 1 April 2003. Archived from the original on 2019-10-16. Retrieved 2007-05-02.

^ Guidoboni E.; Ferrari G.; Mariotti D.; Comastri A.; Tarabusi G.; Sgattoni G.; Valensise G. "1908 12 28, 04:20:27 Calabria meridionale-Messina (Italy)". CFTI5 Catalogue of Strong Earthquakes in Italy (461 BC – 1997) and Mediterranean Area (760 B.C. – 1500).

^ "Earthquake Hazards Program". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2011-05-13. Retrieved 2006-08-14.

^ "USGS Earthquake statistics table based on data since 1900". Archived from the original on May 24, 2010.

^ "Seismicity and earthquake hazard in the UK". Quakes.bgs.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 2010-11-06. Retrieved 2010-08-23.

^ 
"Common Myths about Earthquakes". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2006-09-25. Retrieved 2006-08-14.

^ Are Earthquakes Really on the Increase? Archived 2014-06-30 at the Wayback Machine, USGS Science of Changing World. Retrieved 30 May 2014.

^ 
"Earthquake Facts and Statistics: Are earthquakes increasing?". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2006-08-12. Retrieved 2006-08-14.

^ The 10 biggest earthquakes in history Archived 2013-09-30 at the Wayback Machine, Australian Geographic, March 14, 2011.

^ 
"Historic Earthquakes and Earthquake Statistics: Where do earthquakes occur?". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2006-09-25. Retrieved 2006-08-14.

^ 
"Visual Glossary – Ring of Fire". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2006-08-28. Retrieved 2006-08-14.

^ Jackson, James (2006). "Fatal attraction: living with earthquakes, the growth of villages into megacities, and earthquake vulnerability in the modern world". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. 364 (1845): 1911–1925. Bibcode:2006RSPTA.364.1911J. doi:10.1098/rsta.2006.1805. PMID 16844641. S2CID 40712253. Archived from the original on 2013-09-03. Retrieved 2011-03-09.

^ "Global urban seismic risk Archived 2011-09-20 at the Wayback Machine." Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Science.

^ Fougler, Gillian R.; Wilson, Miles; Gluyas, Jon G.; Julian, Bruce R.; Davies, Richard J. (2018). "Global review of human-induced earthquakes". Earth-Science Reviews. 178: 438–514. Bibcode:2018ESRv..178..438F. doi:10.1016/j.earscirev.2017.07.008.

^ Fountain, Henry (March 28, 2013). "Study Links 2011 Quake to Technique at Oil Wells". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 23, 2020. Retrieved July 23, 2020.

^ Hough, Susan E.; Page, Morgan (2015). "A Century of Induced Earthquakes in Oklahoma?". Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America. 105 (6): 2863–2870. Bibcode:2015BuSSA.105.2863H. doi:10.1785/0120150109. Archived from the original on July 23, 2020. Retrieved July 23, 2020.

^ Klose, Christian D. (July 2012). "Evidence for anthropogenic surface loading as trigger mechanism of the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake". Environmental Earth Sciences. 66 (5): 1439–1447. arXiv:1007.2155. Bibcode:2012EES....66.1439K. doi:10.1007/s12665-011-1355-7. S2CID 118367859.

^ LaFraniere, Sharon (February 5, 2009). "Possible Link Between Dam and China Quake". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 27, 2018. Retrieved July 23, 2020.

^ Earle, Steven (September 2015). "11.3 Measuring Earthquakes". Physical Geology (2nd ed.). Archived from the original on 2022-10-21. Retrieved 2022-10-22.

^ Chung & Bernreuter 1980, p. 1.

^ "USGS Earthquake Magnitude Policy (implemented on January 18, 2002)". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2016-05-04. A copy can be found at "USGS Earthquake Magnitude Policy". Archived from the original on 2017-07-31. Retrieved 2017-07-25.

^ Bormann, P; Di Giacomo, D (2011). "The moment magnitude Mw and the energy magnitude Me: common roots and differences". Journal of Seismology. 15 (2): 411–427. doi:10.1007/s10950-010-9219-2 – via Springer Link.

^ "Speed of Sound through the Earth". Hypertextbook.com. Archived from the original on 2010-11-25. Retrieved 2010-08-23.

^ "Newsela | The science of earthquakes". newsela.com. Archived from the original on 2017-03-01. Retrieved 2017-02-28.

^ Geographic.org. "Magnitude 8.0 – SANTA CRUZ ISLANDS Earthquake Details". Global Earthquake Epicenters with Maps. Archived from the original on 2013-05-14. Retrieved 2013-03-13.

^ "Earth's gravity offers earlier earthquake warnings". Archived from the original on 2016-11-23. Retrieved 2016-11-22.

^ "Gravity shifts could sound early earthquake alarm". Archived from the original on 2016-11-24. Retrieved 2016-11-23.

^ "On Shaky Ground, Association of Bay Area Governments, San Francisco, reports 1995, 1998 (updated 2003)". Abag.ca.gov. Archived from the original on 2009-09-21. Retrieved 2010-08-23.

^ "Guidelines for evaluating the hazard of surface fault rupture, California Geological Survey" (PDF). California Department of Conservation. 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-10-09.

^ "Historic Earthquakes – 1964 Anchorage Earthquake". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2011-06-23. Retrieved 2008-09-15.

^ "The wicked problem of earthquake hazard in developing countries". preventionweb.net. 7 March 2018. Archived from the original on 2022-11-03. Retrieved 2022-11-03.

^ "Earthquake Resources". Nctsn.org. 30 January 2018. Archived from the original on 2018-03-21. Retrieved 2018-06-05.

^ Seal, Dylan M; Jessee, Anna Nowicki; Hamburger, Michael; Dills, Carter; Allstadt, Kate E (2022), Comprehensive Global Database of Earthquake-Induced Landslide Events and Their Impacts (ver. 2.0, February 2022), U.S. Geological Survey, doi:10.5066/P9RG3MBE

^ "The Great 1906 San Francisco earthquake of 1906". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2017-02-11. Retrieved 2008-09-15.

^ a b Noson, L.L.; Qamar, A.; Thorsen, G.W. (1988). Washington Division of Geology and Earth Resources Information Circular 85 (PDF). Washington State Earthquake Hazards. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-02-04. Retrieved 2019-12-01.

^ "Notes on Historical Earthquakes". British Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 2011-05-16. Retrieved 2008-09-15.

^ "Fresh alert over Tajik flood threat". BBC News. 2003-08-03. Archived from the original on 2008-11-22. Retrieved 2008-09-15.

^ Geller et al. 1997, p. 1616, following Allen (1976, p. 2070), who in turn followed Wood & Gutenberg (1935)

^ Earthquake Prediction Archived 2009-10-07 at the Wayback Machine. Ruth Ludwin, U.S. Geological Survey.

^ Lafee, Scott (April 9, 2010). "Quake myths rely on cloudy facts". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Retrieved July 3, 2024.

^ "Is there earthquake weather?". United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on March 3, 2024. Retrieved July 3, 2024.

^ Kanamori 2003, p. 1205.  See also International Commission on Earthquake Forecasting for Civil Protection 2011, p. 327.

^ Working Group on California Earthquake Probabilities in the San Francisco Bay Region, 2003 to 2032, 2003, "Bay Area Earthquake Probabilities". Archived from the original on 2017-02-18. Retrieved 2017-08-28.

^ Pailoplee, Santi (2017-03-13). "Probabilities of Earthquake Occurrences along the Sumatra-Andaman Subduction Zone". Open Geosciences. 9 (1): 4. Bibcode:2017OGeo....9....4P. doi:10.1515/geo-2017-0004. ISSN 2391-5447. S2CID 132545870.

^ Salvaneschi, P.; Cadei, M.; Lazzari, M. (1996). "Applying AI to Structural Safety Monitoring and Evaluation". IEEE Expert. 11 (4): 24–34. doi:10.1109/64.511774.

^ a b c d "Earthquakes". Encyclopedia of World Environmental History. Vol. 1: A–G. Routledge. 2003. pp. 358–364.

^ Sturluson, Snorri (1220). Prose Edda. General Books. ISBN 978-1-156-78621-5. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)

^ George E. Dimock (1990). The Unity of the Odyssey. Univ of Massachusetts Press. p. 179. ISBN 978-0-87023-721-8.

^ "Namazu". World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved 2017-07-23.

^ "Earthquake Island, Taiwan: The Ground Buffalo Myth, Deities and Earthquakes". ARTouch. 14 June 2024. Retrieved 2025-05-05.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)

^ Allison, D., 56. Matthew, in Barton, J. and Muddiman, J. (2001), The Oxford Bible Commentary, p. 884

^ Mark 13:8 and parallels

^ a b c d Van Riper, A. Bowdoin (2002). Science in popular culture: a reference guide. Westport: Greenwood Press. p. 60. ISBN 978-0-313-31822-1.

^ JM Appel. A Comparative Seismology. Weber Studies (first publication), Volume 18, Number 2.

^ Goenjian, Najarian; Pynoos, Steinberg; Manoukian, Tavosian; Fairbanks, AM; Manoukian, G; Tavosian, A; Fairbanks, LA (1994). "Posttraumatic stress disorder in elderly and younger adults after the 1988 earthquake in Armenia". Am J Psychiatry. 151 (6): 895–901. doi:10.1176/ajp.151.6.895. PMID 8185000.

^ Wang, Gao; Shinfuku, Zhang; Zhao, Shen; Zhang, H; Zhao, C; Shen, Y (2000). "Longitudinal Study of Earthquake-Related PTSD in a Randomly Selected Community Sample in North China". Am J Psychiatry. 157 (8): 1260–1266. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.157.8.1260. PMID 10910788.

^ Goenjian, Steinberg; Najarian, Fairbanks; Tashjian, Pynoos (2000). "Prospective Study of Posttraumatic Stress, Anxiety, and Depressive Reactions After Earthquake and Political Violence" (PDF). Am J Psychiatry. 157 (6): 911–916. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.157.6.911. PMID 10831470. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-08-10.

^ Coates, SW; Schechter, D (2004). "Preschoolers' traumatic stress post-9/11: relational and developmental perspectives. Disaster Psychiatry Issue". Psychiatric Clinics of North America. 27 (3): 473–489. doi:10.1016/j.psc.2004.03.006. PMID 15325488.

^ Schechter, DS; Coates, SW; First, E (2002). "Observations of acute reactions of young children and their families to the World Trade Center attacks". Journal of ZERO-TO-THREE: National Center for Infants, Toddlers, and Families. 22 (3): 9–13.

Sources

Allen, Clarence R. (December 1976), "Responsibilities in earthquake prediction", Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 66 (6): 2069–2074, Bibcode:1976BuSSA..66.2069A, doi:10.1785/BSSA0660062069.
Bolt, Bruce A. (1993), Earthquakes and geological discovery, Scientific American Library, ISBN 978-0-7167-5040-6.
Chung, D.H.; Bernreuter, D.L. (1980), Regional Relationships Among Earthquake Magnitude Scales., Office of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI), doi:10.2172/5073993, OSTI 5073993, archived from the original on 2020-01-22, retrieved 2017-07-21, NUREG/CR-1457.
Deborah R. Coen. The Earthquake Observers: Disaster Science From Lisbon to Richter (University of Chicago Press; 2012) 348 pages; explores both scientific and popular coverage
Geller, Robert J.; Jackson, David D.; Kagan, Yan Y.; Mulargia, Francesco (14 March 1997), "Earthquakes Cannot Be Predicted" (PDF), Science, 275 (5306): 1616, doi:10.1126/science.275.5306.1616, S2CID 123516228, archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2019, retrieved 29 December 2016.
International Commission on Earthquake Forecasting for Civil Protection (30 May 2011), "Operational Earthquake Forecasting: State of Knowledge and Guidelines for Utilization" (PDF), Annals of Geophysics, 54 (4): 315–391, doi:10.4401/ag-5350, S2CID 129825964, archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2021.
Kanamori, Hiroo (2003), "Earthquake Prediction: An Overview", International Handbook of Earthquake and Engineering Seismology, International Geophysics, 616: 1205–1216, Bibcode:2003InGeo..81.1205K, doi:10.1016/s0074-6142(03)80186-9, ISBN 978-0-12-440658-2.
Wood, H.O.; Gutenberg, B. (6 September 1935), "Earthquake prediction", Science, 82 (2123): 219–320, Bibcode:1935Sci....82..219W, doi:10.1126/science.82.2123.219, PMID 17818812.

Further reading

Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries

Hyndman, Donald; Hyndman, David (2009). "Chapter 3: Earthquakes and their causes". Natural Hazards and Disasters (2nd ed.). Brooks/Cole: Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-0-495-31667-1.
Liu, ChiChing; Linde, Alan T.; Sacks, I. Selwyn (2009). "Slow earthquakes triggered by typhoons". Nature. 459 (7248): 833–836. Bibcode:2009Natur.459..833L. doi:10.1038/nature08042. ISSN 0028-0836. PMID 19516339. S2CID 4424312.

External links

Earthquake Hazards Program of the U.S. Geological Survey
IRIS Seismic Monitor – IRIS Consortium

vte

Core drill

Cone penetration test

Geo-electrical sounding

Permeability test

Load test
Static
Dynamic
Statnamic

Static
Dynamic
Statnamic

Pore pressure measurement
Piezometer
Well

Piezometer
Well

Ram sounding

Rock control drilling

Rotary-pressure sounding

Rotary weight sounding

Sample series

Screw plate test

Deformation monitoring
 Inclinometer
 Settlement recordings

Inclinometer
 Settlement recordings

Shear vane test

Simple sounding

Standard penetration test

Total sounding

Trial pit

Visible bedrock

Nuclear densometer test

Exploration geophysics

Crosshole sonic logging

Pile integrity test

Wave equation analysis

Clay
Silt
Sand
Gravel
Peat
Loam
Loess

Hydraulic conductivity
Water content
Void ratio
Bulk density
Thixotropy
Reynolds' dilatancy
Angle of repose
Friction angle
Cohesion
Porosity
Permeability
Specific storage
Shear strength
Sensitivity

Topography
Vegetation
Terrain
Topsoil
Water table
Bedrock
Subgrade
Subsoil

Shoring structures
Retaining walls
Gabion
Ground freezing
Mechanically stabilized earth
Pressure grouting
Slurry wall
Soil nailing
Tieback
Land development
Landfill
Excavation
Trench
Embankment
Cut
Causeway
Terracing
Cut-and-cover
Cut and fill
Fill dirt
Grading
Land reclamation
Track bed
Erosion control
Earth structure
Expanded clay aggregate
Crushed stone
Geosynthetics
Geotextile
Geomembrane
Geosynthetic clay liner
Cellular confinement
Infiltration

Retaining walls
Gabion
Ground freezing
Mechanically stabilized earth
Pressure grouting
Slurry wall
Soil nailing
Tieback

Geotextile
Geomembrane
Geosynthetic clay liner
Cellular confinement

Shallow
Deep

Effective stress
Pore water pressure
Lateral earth pressure
Overburden pressure
Preconsolidation pressure

Permafrost
Frost heaving
Consolidation
Compaction
Earthquake
Response spectrum
Seismic hazard
Shear wave
Landslide analysis
Stability analysis
Mitigation
Classification
Sliding criterion
Slab stabilisation
Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil

Response spectrum
Seismic hazard
Shear wave

Stability analysis
Mitigation
Classification
Sliding criterion
Slab stabilisation

SEEP2D
STABL
SVFlux
SVSlope
UTEXAS
Plaxis

Geology
Geochemistry
Petrology
Earthquake engineering
Geomorphology
Soil science
Hydrology
Hydrogeology
Biogeography
Earth materials
Archaeology
Agricultural science
Agrology

Agrology

vte

Landslide
Avalanche
Mudflow
Debris flow

Seismic hazard
Seismic risk
Soil liquefaction

Pyroclastic flow
Lahar
Volcanic ash

Lahar

Sinkhole

Coastal flood
Flash flood
Storm surge

Tsunami
Megatsunami
Limnic eruption

Megatsunami

Blizzard
Cold wave
Ice storm
Heat wave

Megadrought

Bomb cyclone
Thunderstorm (Hail)
Tornado (Tornado outbreak)
Tropical cyclone

Derecho
Wildfire
Firestorm
ARkStorm

Firestorm

Potentially hazardous object
Impact event
Meteor shower
Geomagnetic storm
Solar flare
Supernova
Hypernova

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataJapanCzech RepublicLatviaIsrael

Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraineİslâm Ansiklopedisi

The Burj Khalifa[a] (known as the Burj Dubai prior to its inauguration) is a skyscraper in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. With a total height of 829.8 m (2,722 ft, or just over half a mile) and a roof height (excluding antenna, but including a 242.6 m spire)[2] of  828 m (2,717 ft), it is the world's tallest structure. It has also held the record of the tallest building in the world since its topping out in 2009, surpassing Taipei 101, the holder of that status since 2004.[3][4]

Construction of the Burj Khalifa began in 2004, with the exterior completed five years later in 2009. The primary structure is reinforced concrete and some of the structural steel for the building originated from the Palace of the Republic in East Berlin, the seat of the former East German parliament.[5] The building was opened in 2010 as part of a new development called Downtown Dubai. It was designed to be the centerpiece of large-scale, mixed-use development.

The building is named after the former president of the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan.[6] The United Arab Emirates government provided Dubai with financial support as the developer, Emaar Properties, experienced financial problems during the Great Recession. Then-president of the United Arab Emirates, Khalifa bin Zayed, organized federal financial support. For his support, Mohammad bin Rashid, Ruler of Dubai, changed the name from "Burj Dubai" to "Burj Khalifa" during inauguration.

The design is derived from the Islamic architecture of the region, such as in the Great Mosque of Samarra. The Y-shaped tripartite floor geometry is designed to optimise residential and hotel space. A buttressed central core and wings are used to support the height of the building. The Burj Khalifa's central core houses all vertical transportation except egress stairs within each of the wings.[7] The structure also features a cladding system which is designed to withstand Dubai's hot summer temperatures.[8] It contains a total of 57 elevators and 8 escalators.

Development

Construction began on 12 January 2004, with the exterior of the structure completed on 1 October 2009. The building officially opened on 4 January 2010[9][10] and is part of the 2km² (490 acres) Downtown Dubai development at the 'First Interchange' along Sheikh Zayed Road, near Dubai's main business district.

The tower's architecture and engineering were performed by Skidmore, Owings & Merrill of Chicago, with Adrian Smith as chief architect, and Bill Baker as a chief structural engineer.[11][12] The firm had designed the Sears Tower in Chicago, a previous record holder for the world's tallest building.

Hyder Consulting was supervising engineer and NORR Group Consultants supervised the architecture. The primary contractor was Samsung C&T of South Korea, together with the Belgian group BESIX and the local company Arabtec.[13]

Numerous complaints concerned migrant workers from South Asia, the primary building labour force, who were paid low wages and sometimes had their passports confiscated.[14]

Conception

Burj Khalifa was designed to be the centerpiece of a large-scale, mixed-use development to include 30,000 homes,[15] nine hotels (including The Address Downtown Dubai), 3 hectares (7.4 acres) of parkland, at least 19 residential skyscrapers, the Dubai Mall, and the 12-hectare (30-acre) artificial Burj Khalifa Lake. The decision to build Burj Khalifa was reportedly based on the government's decision to diversify from an oil-based economy to one that is service and tourism based. According to officials, projects like Burj Khalifa needed to be built to garner more international recognition and hence investment. "He (Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum) wanted to put Dubai on the map with something really sensational," said Jacqui Josephson, a tourism and VIP delegations executive at Nakheel Properties.[16]

The tower was known as Burj Dubai ("Dubai Tower") until its official opening in January 2010.[17] It was renamed in honour of the ruler of Abu Dhabi, Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan; Abu Dhabi and the federal government of UAE lent Dubai tens of billions of US dollars so that Dubai could pay its debts – Dubai borrowed at least $80 billion for construction projects.[17] In the 2000s, Dubai started diversifying its economy but it suffered from the 2008 financial crisis and the Great Recession, leaving large-scale projects already in construction abandoned.[18]

Records

The Burj Khalifa set several world records, including:

Tallest existing structure: 829.8 m (2,722 ft) (previously KVLY-TV mast – 628.8 m or 2,063 ft)
Tallest structure ever built: 829.8 m (2,722 ft) (previously Warsaw radio mast – 646.38 m or 2,121 ft)
Tallest freestanding structure: 829.8 m (2,722 ft) (previously CN Tower – 553.3 m or 1,815 ft)
Tallest skyscraper (to top of spire): 828 m (2,717 ft) (previously Taipei 101 – 509.2 m or 1,671 ft)[19]
Tallest skyscraper to top of antenna: 829.8 m (2,722 ft) (previously the Willis (formerly Sears) Tower – 527 m or 1,729 ft)
Building with most floors: 163 (previously World Trade Center – 110)[20]
World's highest elevator installation (situated inside a rod at the very top of the building)[21]
World's longest travel distance elevators: 504 m (1,654 ft)[21][22]
Highest vertical concrete pumping (for a building): 606 m (1,988 ft)[23]
World's tallest structure that includes residential space[24]
World's highest installation of an aluminium and glass façade: 512 m (1,680 ft)[25]
World's highest restaurant (At.mosphere): 122nd floor at 442 m (1,450 ft) (previously 360, at a height of 350 m (1,148 ft) in CN Tower)[26]
World's highest New Year display of fireworks.[27]
World's largest light and sound show staged on a single building.[28][29][30]

Architecture and design

The tower was designed by Skidmore, Owings, and Merrill (SOM), which also designed the Willis Tower (formerly the Sears Tower) in Chicago and the One World Trade Center in New York City. Burj Khalifa uses the bundled tube design of the Willis Tower, invented by Fazlur Rahman Khan.[31][32] Due to its tubular system, proportionally only half the amount of steel was used in the construction, compared to the Empire State Building.[31][33] Khan's contributions to the design of tall buildings have had a profound impact on architecture and engineering. It would be difficult to find any worldwide practices in the design of tall buildings that have not been directly or indirectly influenced by his work.[34] The design is reminiscent of Frank Lloyd Wright's vision for The Illinois, a mile-high skyscraper designed for Chicago, as well as Chicago's Lake Point Tower. When Adrian Smith was conceiving the project at SOM, he looked out his office window toward Lake Point Tower's curved three-wing layout and thought, "There's the prototype".[35] According to Strabala, Burj Khalifa was designed based on the 73rd floor Tower Palace Three, an all-residential building in Seoul. In its early planning, Burj Khalifa was intended to be entirely residential.[36]

After the original design by Skidmore, Owings, and Merrill, Emaar Properties chose Hyder Consulting to be the supervising engineer and NORR Group Consultants International Ltd to supervise the architecture of the project.[37] Hyder was selected for their expertise in structural and MEP (mechanical, electrical and plumbing) engineering.[38] Hyder Consulting's role was to supervise construction, certify the architect's design, and be the engineer and architect of record to the UAE authorities.[37] NORR's role was the supervision of all architectural components including on-site supervision during the construction and design of a 6-storey addition to the office annex building for architectural documentation. NORR was also responsible for the architectural integration drawings for the Armani Hotel included in the Tower. Emaar Properties also engaged GHD,[39] an international multidisciplinary consulting firm, to act as an independent verification and testing authority for concrete and steelwork.

The design is derived from Islamic architecture.[21] As the tower rises from the flat desert base, there are 27 setbacks in a spiral pattern, decreasing the cross-section of the tower as it rises and creating convenient outdoor terraces. These setbacks are arranged and aligned in a way that minimizes vibration wind loading from eddy currents and vortices.[7] At the top, the central core emerges and is sculpted to form a finishing spire. At its tallest point, the tower sways a total of 1.5 m (4.9 ft).[40]

The spire of Burj Khalifa is composed of more than 4,000 tonnes (4,400 short tons; 3,900 long tons) of structural steel. The central pinnacle pipe weighs 350 tonnes (390 short tons; 340 long tons) and has a height of 200 m (660 ft). The spire also houses communications equipment.[41] This 244-metre (801 ft) spire is widely considered vanity height, since very little of its space is usable. Without the spire, Burj Khalifa would be 585 metres (1,919 ft) tall. This was reported in a Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat study, which notes that the empty spire "could be a skyscraper on its own".[2] Such a skyscraper, if located in Europe, would be the 11th tallest building on that continent.[42]

In 2009 architects announced that more than 1,000 pieces of art would adorn the interiors of Burj Khalifa, while the residential lobby of Burj Khalifa would display the work of Jaume Plensa.[43]

The cladding system consists of 142,000 m2 (1,528,000 sq ft) of more than 26,000 reflective glass panels and aluminium and textured stainless steel spandrel panels with vertical tubular fins.[41] The architectural glass provides solar and thermal performance as well as an anti-glare shield for the intense desert sun, extreme desert temperatures and strong winds. The glass covers more than 174,000 m2 (1,870,000 sq ft) in area.[citation needed] The Burj's typical curtain wall panels measure 4 ft 6 in (1.4 m) wide by 10 ft 8 in (3.3 m) high and weigh about 800 pounds (360 kg) each, with wider panels near the building's edges and taller ones near the top.[44]

The exterior temperature at the top of the building is thought to be 6°C (11°F) cooler than at its base.[45][needs update]

A 304-room Armani Hotel, the first of 4 by Armani, occupies 15 of the lower 39 floors.[3][46] The hotel was supposed to open on 18 March 2010,[47][48] but after several delays, it finally opened to the public on 27 April 2010.[49] The corporate suites and offices were also supposed to open from March onwards,[50] yet the hotel and observation deck remained the only parts of the building which were open in April 2010.

The sky lobbies on the 43rd and 76th floors house swimming pools.[51] Floors 20 through 108 have 900 private residential apartments (which, according to the developer, sold out within eight hours of being on the market). An outdoor zero-entry swimming pool is located on the 76th floor of the tower. Corporate offices and suites fill most of the remaining floors, except for the 122nd, 123rd, and 124th, where the Atmosphere restaurant, sky lobby, and an indoor and outdoor observation deck are located respectively. In January 2010, it was planned that Burj Khalifa would receive its first residents in February 2010.[51][52]

The building has 57 elevators and 8 escalators.[41] The elevators have a capacity of 12 to 14 people per cabin, and include the world's fastest double-deck elevators, rising and descending at up to 10 m/s (33 ft/s). Engineers initially considered installing the world's first triple-deck elevators.[24] The double-deckers are equipped with LCD displays to amuse visitors during their travel to the observation deck.[53] The building has 2,909 stairs from the ground floor to the 160th floor.[54]

Plumbing systems

The Burj Khalifa's water system supplies an average of 946,000 L (250,000 U.S. gal) of water per day through 100 km (62 mi) of pipes.[21][55] An additional 213 km (132 mi) of piping serves the fire emergency system, and 34 km (21 mi) supplies chilled water for the air conditioning system.[55]

Air conditioning

The air conditioning system draws air from the upper floors where the air is cooler and cleaner than on the ground.[56] At peak cooling times, the tower's cooling is 46 MW (62,000 hp), equivalent to that provided by 13,000 short tons (26,000,000 lb; 12,000,000 kg) of melting ice in one day.[55] Water is collected via a condensate collection system and is used to irrigate the nearby park.[21]

Window cleaning

To wash the 24,348 windows, totaling 120,000 m2 (1,290,000 sq ft) of glass, the building has three horizontal tracks, each holding a 1,500 kg (3,300 lb) bucket machine. Above level 109, and up to tier 27, traditional cradles from davits are used. The top of the building is cleaned by a crew that uses ropes to descend from the top to gain access.[57][58] Under normal conditions, when all building maintenance units are operational, it takes 36 workers three to four months to clean the entire exterior.[41][59]

Unmanned machines clean the top 27 additional tiers and the glass spire. The cleaning system was developed in Melbourne, Australia, by CoxGomyl, a manufacturer of building maintenance units,[60] at a cost of A$8 million.[59]

Features

Fountain

Outside the Burj Khalifa, WET Enterprises designed a fountain system at a cost of Dh 800 million (US$217 million). Illuminated by 6,600 lights and 50 coloured projectors, it is 270 m (900 ft) long and shoots water 150 m (500 ft) into the air while accompanied by a range of classical to contemporary Arabic and other music. It is the world's largest choreographed fountain.[61] On 26 October 2008, Emaar announced that based on results of a naming contest the fountain would be called the Dubai Fountain.[62]

Observation deck

An outdoor observation deck, named At the Top, opened on 5 January 2010 on the 124th floor, at 452 m (1,483 ft).[63] It opened the 148th floor SKY level at 555 m (1,821 ft), giving it the highest observation deck in the world on 15 October 2014. However, in June 2016 the Shanghai Tower opened with an observation deck at a height of 561 metres, thus taking the title of the world's highest observation deck. Subsequently, on February 18, 2019, the Burj Khalifa also opened The Lounge observatory at 584 m (1,916 ft) – the highest lounge in the world,[64][65]

The Burj Khalifa's 124th floor observation deck also features a so-called electronic telescope, an augmented reality device developed by Gsmprjct° of Montréal, which allows visitors to view the surrounding landscape in real-time, and to view previously saved images such as those taken at different times of day or under different weather conditions.[66][67][68] To reduce the daily rush of sightseers, management allows visitors to purchase tickets in advance for a specific date and time, at a 75% discount on tickets purchased on the spot.[69]

On 8 February 2010, the observation deck was closed to the public for two months after power-supply problems caused an elevator to become stuck between floors, trapping a group of tourists for 45 minutes.[70][71][72][73][74]

When the tide is low and visibility is high, people can see the shores of Iran (which is around 153 km or 95 mi away) from the top of the skyscraper.[75]

Park

Burj Khalifa is surrounded by an eleven-hectare (27-acre) park designed by landscape architects SWA Group.[76] Like the tower, the park's design was based on the flower of the Hymenocallis, a desert plant.[77] At the centre of the park is the water room, which is a series of pools and water jet fountains. Benches and signs incorporate images of Burj Khalifa and the Hymenocallis flower.[78]

The plants are watered by water collected from the building's cooling system. The system provides 68,000,000 L (18,000,000 US gal) annually.[78] WET Enterprises, who also developed the Dubai Fountain, developed the park's six water features.[79]

Floor plan

Ramadan observance

On the higher floors, the sun is seen for several minutes after it has set at ground level. Those living above the 80th floor should wait two extra minutes to break their Ramadan fast, and those living above the 150th floor should wait three minutes.[82]

Construction

The tower was constructed by Samsung C&T from South Korea, which also did work on the Petronas Twin Towers and Taipei 101.[83] Samsung C&T built the tower in a joint venture with BESIX from Belgium and Arabtec from the UAE.[84][85] Turner was the project manager on the main construction contract.[86] Hong Kong-based Far East Aluminium combined to provide the exterior cladding for Burj Khalifa.[87][88]

The contractor and the engineer of record was Hyder Consulting.[89] Under UAE law, the contractor and the engineer of record is jointly and severally liable for the performance of Burj Khalifa.

The primary structure is reinforced concrete. Putzmeister created a new, super high-pressure trailer concrete pump, the BSA 14000 SHP-D, for this project.[23] Burj Khalifa's construction used 330,000 m3 (431,600 cu yd) of concrete and 55,000 tonnes (61,000 short tons; 54,000 long tons) of steel rebar, and construction took 22 million man-hours.[11] In May 2008 Putzmeister pumped concrete with more than 21 MPA ultimate compressive strength of gravel to surpass the 600 metres weight of the effective area of each column from the foundation to the next 4th level, and the rest was by metal columns jacketed or covered with concrete to a then world record delivery height of 606 m (1,988 ft),[23] the 156th floor. Three tower cranes were used during the construction of the uppermost levels, each capable of lifting a 25-tonne load.[90] The remaining structure above was constructed of lighter steel.

In 2003, 33 test holes were drilled to study the strength of the bedrock underlying the structure.[91] "Weak to very weak sandstone and siltstone" was found, just metres below the surface.[92] Samples were taken from test holes drilled to a depth of 140 metres, finding weak to very weak rock all the way.[93] The study described the site as part of a "seismically active area".[citation needed] Another challenging element was the shamal which often creates sandstorms.[19]

Over 45,000 m3 (58,900 cu yd) of concrete, weighing more than 110,000 tonnes (120,000 short tons; 110,000 long tons) were used to construct the concrete and steel foundation, which features 192 piles; each pile is 1.5 metre in diameter by 43 m in length, buried more than 50 m (164 ft) deep.[24] The foundation was designed to support the total building weight of approximately 450,000 tonnes (500,000 short tons; 440,000 long tons). This weight was then divided by the compressive strength of concrete which is 30 MPa which yielded 450 sq. metres of vertical normal effective area, which then yielded 12 metres by 12 metres dimensions.[94] A cathodic protection system is under the concrete to neutralise the sulphate and chloride-rich groundwater and prevent corrosion.[41][19]

During the construction of the Burj Khalifa, over 35,000 tonnes of structural steel which held the Palace of the Republic, the former parliament building of the German Democratic Republic, the Volkskammer, in East Berlin together were shipped to Dubai in 2008.[5]

The Burj Khalifa is highly compartmentalised. Pressurised, air-conditioned refuge floors are located every 13 floors (on floors G, 13, 26, 39, 52, etc.) where people can shelter on their long walk down to safety in case of an emergency or fire.[41][95]

Special mixes of concrete were made to withstand the extreme pressures of the massive building weight; as is typical with reinforced concrete construction, each batch of concrete was tested to ensure it could withstand certain pressures. CTLGroup, working for Skidmore, Owings and Merrill, conducted the creep and shrinkage testing critical for the structural analysis of the building.[96]

The consistency of the concrete used in the project was essential. It was difficult to create a concrete that could withstand both the thousands of tonnes bearing down on it and Persian Gulf temperatures that can reach 50 °C (122 °F). To combat this problem, the concrete was not poured during the day. Instead, during the summer months, ice was added to the mixture and it was poured at night when the air was cooler and the humidity was higher. Cooler concrete cures more evenly and is, therefore, less likely to set too quickly and crack. Any significant cracks could have put the entire project in jeopardy.[97][98][99][100][101]

Milestones

January 2004: Excavation commences.[25]
February 2004: Piling starts.[25]
21 September 2004: Emaar contractors begin construction.[102]
March 2005: Structure of Burj Khalifa starts rising.[25]
June 2006: Level 50 is reached.[25]
February 2007: Surpasses the Sears Tower as the building with the most floors.
13 May 2007: Sets record for vertical concrete pumping on any building at 452 m (1,483 ft), surpassing the 449.2 m (1,474 ft) to which concrete was pumped during the construction of Taipei 101, while Burj Khalifa reached the 130th floor.[25][103]
21 July 2007: Surpasses Taipei 101, whose height of 509.2 m (1,671 ft) made it the world's tallest building, and level 141 reached.[25][104]
12 August 2007: Surpasses the Sears Tower antenna, which stands 527 m (1,729 ft).
12 September 2007: At 555.3 m (1,822 ft), becomes the world's tallest freestanding structure, surpassing the CN Tower in Toronto, and level 150 reached.[25][105]
7 April 2008: At 629 m (2,064 ft), surpasses the KVLY-TV Mast to become the tallest human-made structure, level 160 reached.[25][106]
17 June 2008: Emaar announces that Burj Khalifa's height is over 636 m (2,087 ft) and that its final height will not be given until it is completed in September 2009.[107]
1 September 2008: Height tops 688 m (2,257 ft), making it the tallest human-made structure ever built, surpassing the previous record-holder, the Warsaw Radio Mast in Konstantynów, Poland.[108]
17 January 2009: Topped out at 829.8 m (2,722 ft).[109]
1 October 2009: Emaar announces that the exterior of the building is completed.[110]
4 January 2010: Burj Khalifa's official launch ceremony is held and Burj Khalifa is opened. Burj Dubai was renamed Burj Khalifa in honour of the President of the UAE and ruler of Abu Dhabi, Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed al Nahyan.[4]
10 March 2010: Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat certifies Burj Khalifa as world's tallest building.[111]

Real estate values

In March 2009, Mohamed Ali Alabbar, chairman of the project's developer, Emaar Properties, said office space pricing at Burj Khalifa reached US$4,000 per sq ft (over US$43,000 per m2) and the Armani Residences, also in Burj Khalifa, sold for US$3,500 per sq ft (over US$37,500 per m2).[112] He estimated the total cost for the project to be about US$1.5 billion.[6]

The project's completion coincided with the Great Recession, and with vast overbuilding in the country, leading to high vacancies and foreclosures.[113] With Dubai mired in debt from its huge ambitions, the government was forced to seek multibillion-dollar bailouts from its oil-rich neighbor Abu Dhabi. Subsequently, in a surprise move at its opening ceremony, the tower was renamed Burj Khalifa, said to honour the UAE President Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan for his crucial support.[4][114]

Because of the slumping demand in Dubai's property market, the rents in the Burj Khalifa plummeted 40% some ten months after its opening. Out of 900 apartments in the tower, 825 were still empty at that time.[115][116] Over the next 30 months, overseas investors steadily bought up available apartments and office space.[117] By October 2012, Emaar reported that around 80% of the apartments were occupied.[118]

Official launch ceremony

The ceremony was broadcast live on a giant screen on Burj Park Island and on smaller screens elsewhere.[119] Hundreds of media outlets from around the world reported live from the scene.[120] In addition to the media presence, 6,000 guests were expected.[121]

The opening was held on 4 January 2010.[122] The ceremony featured a display of 10,000 fireworks, light beams projected on and around the tower, and further sound, light and water effects.[120] The celebratory lighting was designed by UK lighting designers Speirs and Major Associates.[123] Using the 868 powerful stroboscope lights that are integrated into the façade and spire of the tower, different lighting sequences were choreographed, together with more than 50 different combinations of other effects.[citation needed]

Controversies

Incidents

On 10 May 2011, an Asian migrant worker in his mid-30s jumped to his death from the 147th floor onto the 108th floor's deck. Dubai police said he killed himself because his company refused to let him leave the country.[124]

On 18 May 2015, Dubai police disputed a report that a Portuguese tourist named Laura Vanessa Nunes fell to her death from the Burj Khalifa the prior 16 November, claiming that she fell from the Jumeirah Lake Towers.[125][126] Nine News obtained emails from Portugal's embassy in the UAE under freedom of information laws, which indicated that the female tourist jumped from the 148th floor of the Burj Khalifa.[127]

Labour

The Burj Khalifa was built primarily by workers from South Asia and East Asia.[128][129] This is generally because the current generation of UAE locals prefer governmental jobs and do not have an attitude favouring private sector employment.[130][131] On 17 June 2008, there were about 7,500 skilled workers employed at the construction site.[107] Press reports indicated in 2006 that skilled carpenters at the site earned £4.34 a day, and labourers earned £2.84.[128] According to a BBC investigation and a Human Rights Watch report, the workers were housed in abysmal conditions, and worked long hours for low pay.[132][133][134] During construction, one construction-related death was reported.[135] Workplace injuries and deaths in the UAE are poorly documented, according to Human Rights Watch.[132]

In March 2006 about 2,500 workers, upset over buses that were delayed for the end of their shifts, protested and triggered a riot, damaging cars, offices, computers, and construction equipment.[128] A Dubai Interior Ministry official said the rioters caused almost £500,000 in damage.[128] Most of the workers involved in the riot returned the following day but refused to work.[128]

New Year's Eve

Emaar New Year's Eve is an annual event held every 31 December at Burj Khalifa, organised by Emaar Properties.[136][137] The event consists of fireworks launched from Burj Khalifa, a light and laser show on the facade of Burj Khalifa, and an accompanying soundtrack and a special fountain show on The Dubai Fountain choreographed to the soundtrack.[138][139] The Emaar New Year's Eve fireworks celebration originated in 2010 with the inauguration of the world's tallest building, Burj Khalifa. The celebration was broadcast live to more than 2 million people and lasted for 3 minutes.[140]

Since 2011, national live broadcasting rights have been held by Dubai Media Incorporated and Dubai TV.[140]

Emaar New Year's Eve has won two Guinness World Records, including 'Largest LED-Illuminated Facade' in 2015 and 2019.[141][142][143]

In 2017 and 2018, Emaar New Year's Eve was broadcast live on Twitter,[144][145] and YouTube. In 2020, it was broadcast live for the first time on Zoom.[146]

In 2021, Emaar celebrated solidarity in honour of frontline workers of the COVID-19 pandemic.[147]

For the 2022 event, a laser feature was installed on The Dubai Fountain in sync with the Burj Khalifa's laser and fireworks show.[148]

BASE jumping

The building has been used by several experienced BASE jumpers for authorised and unauthorised BASE jumping:

In May 2008, Hervé Le Gallou and David McDonnell, dressed as engineers, entered Burj Khalifa (around 650 metres (2,130 ft) at the time), and jumped off a balcony situated several floors below the 160th floor.[149][150]

On 8 January 2010, with permission of the authorities, Nasr Al Niyadi and Omar Al Hegelan, from the Emirates Aviation Society, broke the world record for the highest BASE jump from a building after they leapt from a crane-suspended platform attached to the 160th floor at 672 m (2,205 ft). The two men descended the vertical drop at a speed of up to 220 km/h (140 mph), with enough time to open their parachutes 10 seconds into the 90-second jump.[151][152]

On 21 April 2014, with permission of the authorities and support from several sponsors, highly experienced French BASE jumpers Vince Reffet and Fred Fugen broke the Guinness world record for the highest BASE jump from a building after they leapt from a specially designed platform, built at the very top of the pinnacle, at 828 metres (2,717 feet).[153][154][155]

Climbing

On 28 March 2011, Alain "Spiderman" Robert scaled the outside of Burj Khalifa. The climb to the top of the spire took 6 hours. To comply with UAE safety laws, Robert, who usually climbs in free solo style, used a rope and harness.[156]

Awards

In June 2010, Burj Khalifa was the recipient of the 2010 "Best Tall Building Middle East & Africa" award by the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat.[157] On 28 September 2010 Burj Khalifa won the award for the best project of the year at the Middle East Architect Awards 2010.[158] Awards Chair Gordon Gill, of Adrian Smith + Gordon Gill Architecture, said:

We are talking about a building here that has changed the landscape of what is possible in architecture – a building that became internationally recognized as an icon long before it was even completed. 'Building of the Century' was thought a more apt title for it.[159]

Burj Khalifa was also the recipient of the following awards.[160][161]

See also

United Arab Emirates portalArchitecture portal

List of buildings in Dubai
List of buildings with 100 floors or more
List of development projects in Dubai
List of tallest buildings and structures
List of tallest freestanding structures
List of tallest buildings in Dubai
List of tallest buildings in the United Arab Emirates
List of tallest buildings
List of tallest structures
Jeddah Tower

Notes

^ Arabic: بُرْج خَلِيفَة, Burj Khalīfah, pronounced [bʊrd͡ʒ xaˈliːfa], lit. 'Khalifa tower'

References

^ "Burj Khalifa". CTBUH Skyscraper Center.

^ a b "the world's vainest skyscrapers". Archived from the original on 17 November 2013. Retrieved 23 December 2013.

^ a b "Burj Khalifa – The Skyscraper Center". Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat. Archived from the original on 24 December 2014. Retrieved 15 November 2014.

^ a b c Bianchi, Stefania; Andrew Critchlow (4 January 2010). "World's Tallest Skyscraper Opens in Dubai". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 28 February 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2010.

^ a b "Berlin's Demolished Socialist Palace is Revived in Dubai". Deutsche Welle. 11 August 2008. Archived from the original on 9 May 2009. Retrieved 13 August 2008.

^ a b Stanglin, Douglas (2 January 2010). "Dubai opens world's tallest building". USA Today. Archived from the original on 5 January 2010. Retrieved 4 January 2010.

^ a b Baker, William; Pawlikowski, James. "Higher and Higher: The Evolution of the Buttressed Core" (PDF). academic.csuohio.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017.

^ "State-of-the-Art & Structural Design Elements". Burj Khalifa.

^ "Official Opening of Iconic Burj Dubai Announced". Gulfnews. 4 November 2009. Archived from the original on 6 November 2009. Retrieved 4 November 2009.

^ "World's tallest building opens in Dubai". BBC News. 4 January 2010. Archived from the original on 5 January 2010. Retrieved 4 January 2010.

^ a b "Burj Dubai reaches a record high". Emaar Properties. 21 July 2007. Archived from the original on 10 July 2011. Retrieved 24 November 2008.

^ Keegan, Edward (15 October 2006). "Adrian Smith Leaves SOM, Longtime Skidmore partner bucks retirement to start new firm". ArchitectOnline. Archived from the original on 27 December 2008. Retrieved 23 March 2009.

^ "Burj Dubai, Dubai – SkyscraperPage.com". SkyscraperPage. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 23 March 2009.

^ "Archi-Ninja | Burj Khalifa (Dubai) – The Truth Behind the Bling". Archived from the original on 28 June 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2023.

^ "Buildings that elevated cities: Dubai's Burj Khalifa". ww3.rics.org. Retrieved 9 July 2024.

^ Stack, Megan (13 October 2005). "In Dubai, the Sky's No Limit". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 21 October 2008. Retrieved 26 March 2006.

^ a b "Dubai Tower's Name Reflects U.A.E. Shift". Businessweek.com. Archived from the original on 30 May 2015.

^ Lewis, Paul (13 February 2009). "Dubai's six-year building boom grinds to a halt as financial crisis takes hold". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 23 January 2021.

^ a b c Dupré, Judith (2013). Skyscrapers: A History of the World's Most Extraordinary Buildings-Revised and Updated. New York: Hachette/Black Dog & Leventhal. pp. 140–141. ISBN 978-1-57912-942-2. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023.

^ "WTC Timeline". Silverstein Properties. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 28 March 2013.

^ a b c d e "Burj Khalifa: Towering challenge for builders". GulfNews.com. 4 January 2010. Archived from the original on 25 January 2011. Retrieved 10 February 2010.

^ "Burj Khalifa". Otis Elevator. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 15 April 2013.

^ a b c "Burj Khalifa – Conquering the World's Tallest Building". ForConstructionPros.com. 12 May 2010. Archived from the original on 28 November 2022. Retrieved 2 November 2012.

^ a b c "Burj Dubai, Dubai, at Emporis.com". Emporis. Archived from the original on 20 January 2007. Retrieved 1 March 2007.

^ a b c d e f g h i "Burj Dubai Construction Timeline". BurjDubai.com. Archived from the original on 15 December 2009. Retrieved 31 December 2009.

^ "And the world's highest restaurant is ready to serve". Emirates 24/7. 20 January 2011. Archived from the original on 22 July 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2011.

^ "Jaw-Dropping Fireworks at Burj Khalifa Enthrall Thousands". Gulfnews.com. 31 December 2010. Archived from the original on 20 January 2011. Retrieved 29 May 2011.

^ "New Year fireworks at Burj Khalifa to return this year". Khaleej Times. Archived from the original on 27 July 2020. Retrieved 28 November 2018.

^ Report, Web. "Burj Khalifa to have special light show this New Year's Eve, but what about the fireworks?". Khaleej Times. Archived from the original on 28 November 2018. Retrieved 28 November 2018.

^ "Emaar bags Guinness World Record title for largest light and sound show on a single building". Saudigazette. 6 January 2018. Archived from the original on 28 November 2018. Retrieved 28 November 2018.

^ a b "Top 10 world's tallest steel buildings". Constructionweekonline.com. Archived from the original on 3 February 2015. Retrieved 14 June 2013.

^ "Burj Khalifa". AllAboutSkyscrapers.com. 19 November 2012. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012. Retrieved 14 June 2013.

^ Bayley, Stephen (5 January 2010). "Burj Dubai: The new pinnacle of vanity". Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022.

^ "IALCCE 2012: Keynote Speakers Details". ialcce2012.boku.ac.at. Archived from the original on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 5 June 2017.

^ Kamin, Blair. "50 years later, Lake Point Tower is a singular achievement — and let's hope it stays that way". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 11 February 2019. Retrieved 23 September 2018.

^ "Architect reveals Burj Dubai height". Arabian Business. 3 December 2008. Archived from the original on 4 December 2008. Retrieved 3 December 2008.

^ a b "Burj Dubai becomes tallest manmade structure". Hyder Consulting. Retrieved 10 January 2010.[dead link]

^ "Hyder reinforces its reputation for unrivaled engineering ability with the opening of the Burj Khalifa – the world's tallest building". Hyder Consulting. Retrieved 10 January 2010.[dead link]

^ "GHD is playing a vital role in managing the long term structural integrity of the world's tallest building, the Burj Dubai Tower". GHD. Archived from the original on 2 December 2008. Retrieved 11 April 2009.

^ Saberi, Mahmood (19 April 2008). "Burj Dubai is the height of success". Gulf News. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010. Retrieved 31 December 2009.

^ a b c d e f g "Structural Elements – Elevator, Spire, and More". BurjDubai.com. Archived from the original on 15 December 2009. Retrieved 31 December 2009.

^ "Vanity height: how much space in skyscrapers is unoccupiable?". The Guardian. 3 February 2017. Archived from the original on 20 February 2018. Retrieved 20 February 2018.

^ "Skidmore, Owings & Merrill Leads Process for Art Program at Burj Dubai". 28 May 2009. Archived from the original on 24 April 2010.

^ Shapiro, Gideon Fink (11 March 2010). "Detail: Burj Khalifa Curtain Wall (Architect Magazine)". www.architectmagazine.com. Archived from the original on 9 August 2015. Retrieved 21 March 2018.

^ "Temperature and Elevation". United States Department of Energy. 21 May 2002. Archived from the original on 15 April 2009. Retrieved 11 April 2009.

^ "Armani Hotel Burj Dubai, United Arab Emirates". hotelmanagement-network.com. Archived from the original on 29 January 2009. Retrieved 11 April 2009.

^ "Worlds first Armani Hotel to open on 18 March 2010 in Dubai". EyeOfDubai.com. 4 January 2010. Archived from the original on 4 October 2011. Retrieved 8 January 2010.

^ Sambidge, Andy (4 January 2010). "Burj Dubai's Armani hotel to open on Mar 18". Arabian Business. Archived from the original on 8 January 2010. Retrieved 8 January 2010.

^ "Armani hotel opens in Dubai's Khalifa tower". The Jerusalem Post. 27 April 2010. Archived from the original on 1 May 2010. Retrieved 27 April 2010.

^ "Burj Dubai: Fact Sheet". Eyeofdubai.com. Archived from the original on 6 January 2010. Retrieved 11 May 2010.

^ a b "Burj Dubai to welcome residents in Feb 2010". Business Standard. 1 January 2010. Archived from the original on 8 January 2010. Retrieved 9 January 2010.

^ "Burj Dubai To Welcome First Residents From February 2010 Onwards". DubaiCityGuide. 31 December 2009. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 9 January 2010.

^ CW Staff (16 January 2010). "How the Burj was built". ConstructionWeekOnline.com. Archived from the original on 24 March 2010. Retrieved 11 May 2010.

^ "Top 10 Burj Khalifa facts: Part 3". ConstructionWeekOnline.com. Archived from the original on 6 October 2011. Retrieved 8 January 2010.

^ a b c "Escaping the Dubai Downturn: Voltas's Latest Engineering Feat". Wharton, University of Pennsylvania. 20 April 2010. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 21 May 2011.

^ "Air Conditioning in Burj Khalifa". Timeoutdubai.com. 11 January 2010. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 17 April 2011.

^ "A tall order: Burj Dubai all set to come clean". Gulf News. 25 August 2009. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 7 December 2009.

^  Window cleaning the world's tallest building on YouTube from Supersized Earth – Episode 1 – BBC One Archived 4 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine

^ a b Dobbin, Marika (5 January 2010). "So you think your windows are hard to keep clean?". The Age. Melbourne, Australia. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010. Retrieved 6 January 2010.

^ Malkin, Bonnie (5 January 2010). "Burj Khalifa: window cleaners to spend months on world's tallest building". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2011.,

^ Tolbert, Jason (6 February 2015). "The Dubai Fountain". Architect Magazine. Archived from the original on 8 September 2015. Retrieved 13 July 2021.

^ "'Dubai Fountain' is winning name of Emaar's water spectacle in Downtown Burj Dubai". Emaar Properties. 26 October 2008. Archived from the original on 10 January 2014. Retrieved 26 October 2008.

^ "Burj Dubai Observation Deck Opens to The Public On Jan 5". Bayut.com. 4 January 2010. Archived from the original on 5 January 2010. Retrieved 6 January 2010.

^ Willett, Megan (17 October 2014). "Dubai's Burj Khalifa Now Has The Highest Observation Deck In The World At 1,821 Feet, And It Looks Incredible". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 5 January 2023. Retrieved 6 December 2014.

^ "At the Top, Burj Khalifa Experience". burjkhalifa.ae. Burj Khalifa. Archived from the original on 29 August 2015. Retrieved 6 December 2014.

^ "Augmented Reality – gsmprjct°". gsmprjct°. Archived from the original on 2 December 2014. Retrieved 6 December 2014.

^ "At the Top, Burj Khalifa". gsmprjct°. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 6 December 2014.

^ "Une firme québécoise dans la plus haute tour du monde". Journal de Montréal (in French). 4 January 2010. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 19 August 2010.

^ "'At The Top' Observation Deck Ticket Information". Emaar Properties. Archived from the original on 7 February 2010. Retrieved 9 February 2010.

^ "Emaar Says Burj Khalifa Observation Deck Closed for Maintenance". Bloomberg. 8 February 2010. Archived from the original on 11 February 2010. Retrieved 9 February 2010.

^ Tomlinson, Hugh (10 February 2010). "Terrifying lift ordeal at Burj Khalifa tower, the world's tallest building". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on 5 January 2023. Retrieved 10 February 2010.

^ "World's tallest building, Burj Khalifa, reopens observation deck". The Guardian. UK. 5 April 2010. Archived from the original on 15 February 2023. Retrieved 6 April 2010.

^ "Burj Khalifa observation deck reopens". GulfNews.com. 5 April 2010. Archived from the original on 5 January 2023. Retrieved 6 April 2010.

^ Rackl, Lori (5 April 2010). "Machu Picchu and Burj Khalifa back in biz". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on 8 April 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010.

^ "The View From Dubai". The New York Times. 6 October 2013. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 26 February 2017.

^ "An 11-hectare green oasis envelops the foot of Burj Dubai". Emaar Properties. 20 December 2009. Archived from the original on 10 July 2011. Retrieved 20 March 2010.

^ "An 11-hectare green oasis envelops the foot of Burj Dubai". BurjDubai.com. 20 December 2009. Archived from the original on 10 January 2010. Retrieved 10 January 2010.

^ a b Baxter, Elsa (20 December 2009). "11-hectare park unveiled at Burj Dubai site". Arabian Business. Archived from the original on 23 December 2009. Retrieved 10 January 2010.

^ "An 11-hectare green oasis envelops the foot of Burj Dubai". Emaar Properties. 20 December 2009. Archived from the original on 10 July 2011. Retrieved 10 January 2010.

^ "Inside the Burj Dubai". Maktoob News. 28 December 2009. Archived from the original on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 10 January 2010.

^ "Burj Khalifa – Structural engineering". Skidmore, Owings & Merrill LLP. Archived from the original on 11 September 2014. Retrieved 2 December 2018.

^ BBC Staff (7 August 2011). "Dubai Burj Khalifa: Ramadan fast 'lasts longer high up'". BBC News. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2017.

^ "Samsung E&C Projects". Samsung Engineering & Construction. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 23 March 2009.

^ "Profits on the descent at Burj Khalifa builder Arabtec". The National. 8 March 2012. Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 6 September 2018. Arabtec Holding, the UAE's biggest construction company, posted a 15 per cent decline in full-year profit.

^ "Besix wins $2.7bn Abu Dhabi building orders". Arabian Business. 24 May 2010. Retrieved 6 September 2018. Besix, the Belgian contractor that helped build the Burj Khalifa, said that it had won $2.7bn worth of orders in Abu Dhabi.

^ "Turner International Projects – Burj Dubai". Turner Construction. Archived from the original on 20 December 2008. Retrieved 23 March 2009.

^ "Technical Case Studies – Burj Khalifa". Far East Global Group. Archived from the original on 22 July 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2019.

^ "Dubai skyscraper missing its 'curtain wall' exterior". Far East Global Group. Archived from the original on 8 July 2019. Retrieved 7 July 2019.

^ "Hyder consulting presenting Burj Dubai to the world". Arabian Business. 16 August 2007. Retrieved 6 September 2018.

^ Croucher, Martin (11 November 2009). "Myth of 'Babu Sassi' Remains After Burj Cranes Come Down". Khaleej Times. Archived from the original on 1 October 2012. Retrieved 3 June 2011.

^ Harry G. Poulos, Grahame Bunce (2008). "Foundation Design for the Burj Dubai – The World's Tallest Building" (PDF). 6th International Conference on Case Histories in Geotechnical Engineering. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 April 2011. Retrieved 24 September 2016. Medium dense to very loose granular silty sands (Marine Deposits) are underlain by successions of very weak to weak sandstone interbedded with very weakly cemented sand, gypsiferous fine-grained sandstone/siltstone, and weak to moderately weak conglomerate/calcisiltite.

^ "Burj Khalifa | PDF | Engineering | Civil Engineering". Scribd. Retrieved 9 July 2024.

^ Randy Post (4 January 2010). "Foundations and Geotechnical Engineering for the Burj Dubai – World's Tallest Building". GeoPrac. Archived from the original on 23 September 2016. Retrieved 24 September 2016. The soil/rock conditions were generally loose to medium dense sands overlying weak to very weak sandstone and siltstone with interbeds of gypsiferous and carbonate cemented layers (still relatively weak).

^ Van Hampton, Tudor (2 April 2008). "Clyde N. Baker Jr". Engineering News-Record. New York: McGraw Hill Construction. Archived from the original on 11 September 2015. Retrieved 11 August 2015.

^ Puckett, Katie (3 October 2008). "Burj Dubai: Top of the world". Building. Retrieved 31 December 2009.

^ "Clients & Projects – Burj Khalifa, the Tallest Building in the World". CTLGroup. Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 29 May 2011.

^ Al-Tayyib, A.J.; Baluch, M.H.; Sharif, Al-Farabi M.; Mahamud, M.M. (1989). "The effect of thermal cycling on the durability of concrete made from local materials in the Arabian Gulf countries". Cement and Concrete Research. 19 (1): 131–142. doi:10.1016/0008-8846(89)90073-2. ISSN 0008-8846.

^ Ji, Jun; Elnashai, Amr S.; Kuchma, Daniel A. (2009). "Seismic fragility relationships of reinforced concrete high-rise buildings". The Structural Design of Tall and Special Buildings. 18 (3): 259–277. doi:10.1002/tal.408. ISSN 1541-7794. S2CID 109960316.

^ Gjørv, Odd E. (2011). "Durability of concrete structures". Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering. 36 (2): 151–172. doi:10.1007/s13369-010-0033-5. ISSN 1319-8025. S2CID 110936887.

^ Friedman, Daniel (2018). "Effects of curing temperature on concrete: shrinkage cracks and spalling concrete". Archived from the original on 19 February 2021. Retrieved 13 September 2020.

^ Bester, Nicholas (2013). "Concrete for high-rise buildings: Performance requirements, mix design and construction considerations". Structural Concrete Properties and Practice: 1–4.

^ "Dubai skyscraper world's tallest". BBC News. 22 July 2007. Archived from the original on 9 February 2009. Retrieved 31 December 2009.

^ "Burj Dubai: Unimix sets record for concrete pumping". Dubai News Online. 25 May 2007. Archived from the original on 23 November 2007. Retrieved 11 April 2009.

^ "Burj Dubai Official Website". Emaar Properties. Archived from the original on 3 February 2011. Retrieved 8 March 2008.

^ "CN Tower dethroned by Dubai building". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 12 September 2007. Archived from the original on 3 July 2007. Retrieved 13 September 2007.

^ "Burj Dubai surpasses KVLY-TV mast to become the world's tallest man-made structure". Emaar Properties. 7 April 2008. Archived from the original on 10 July 2011. Retrieved 7 April 2008.

^ a b "Emaar increases height of Burj Dubai; completion in September 2009". Emaar Properties. 17 June 2008. Archived from the original on 10 July 2011. Retrieved 17 October 2008.

^ "Burj Dubai now a record 688 m tall and continues to rise". Emaar Properties. 1 September 2008. Archived from the original on 10 January 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2008.

^ "Burj Dubai all set for 09/09/09 soft opening". Emirates Business 24-7. Archived from the original on 19 January 2009. Retrieved 17 January 2009.

^ "Burj Dubai exterior done, to open this year". Maktoob News. 1 October 2009. Archived from the original on 2 October 2009. Retrieved 1 October 2009.

^ "Tallest Trends and the Burj Khalifa". Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat. 10 March 2010. Archived from the original on 14 September 2016. Retrieved 27 April 2012.

^ "Burj Dubai offices to top US$4,000 per sq ft". Zawya. 5 March 2008. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 23 March 2009.

^ Christopher Hawthorne (1 January 2010). "The Burj Dubai and architecture's vacant stare". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 4 January 2010. Retrieved 4 January 2010.

^ "828-metre Burj Dubai renamed Burj Khalifa". Maktoob Group. 4 January 2010. Archived from the original on 24 February 2010. Retrieved 10 February 2010.

^ Reagan, Brad (14 October 2010). "Burj Khalifa rents tumble 40%". The National. Archived from the original on 18 October 2010. Retrieved 6 November 2010.

^ McGinley, Shane (21 October 2010). "Armani Residences defy 70% Burj Khalifa price drop". Arabian Business. Retrieved 6 November 2010.

^ "Offices stand empty in tallest tower, the Burj Khalifa". BBC. 21 July 2012. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013. Retrieved 28 March 2013.

^ "Emaar Reports 80% Occupancy Levels In Burj Khalifa". REIDIN.com. Archived from the original on 1 February 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2012.

^ Moonshiner (29 November 2018). "Best Bars in Dubai with Burj Khalifa Views". Moonshine. Archived from the original on 6 December 2018. Retrieved 9 December 2018.

^ a b Sambidge, Andy (3 January 2010). "Burj Dubai ceremony details revealed". Arabian Business. Archived from the original on 6 January 2010. Retrieved 5 January 2010.

^ "Two billion to watch Burj Dubai opening". Maktoob Business. 3 January 2010. Archived from the original on 1 February 2010. Retrieved 5 January 2010.

^ Huang, Carol (5 January 2010). "World's tallest building: What's it worth to have the Dubai tower – and what should people call it?". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 5 January 2010. Retrieved 6 January 2010.

^ Devine, Rachel (21 February 2010). "Designer's light touches far and wide". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Retrieved 29 November 2010.

^ "Man dies in jump from world's tallest building". CNN. 12 May 2011. Archived from the original on 29 May 2011. Retrieved 29 May 2011.

^ "No suicide at Burj Khalifa say Dubai Police". Gulf News. 18 May 2015. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 28 August 2015.

^ Perring, Rebecca (19 May 2015). "Is Dubai trying to cover-up woman's death from the top of world's tallest building?". Archived from the original on 5 October 2017. Retrieved 5 October 2017.

^ Saunokonoko, Mark (16 November 2017). "How rich Gulf emirate Dubai covered up woman's suicide from top of Burj Khalifa". Nine News Australia. Archived from the original on 16 November 2017. Retrieved 22 November 2017.

^ a b c d e Whitaker, Brian (23 March 2006). "Riot by migrant workers halts construction of Dubai skyscraper". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 25 March 2006.

^ "Burj Dubai opens tomorrow, final height still a secret!". The Hindu. India. 3 January 2010. Archived from the original on 5 August 2011. Retrieved 6 January 2010.

^ Ayesha Almazroui. "Emiratisation won't work if people don't want to learn". thenational.ae. Archived from the original on 26 April 2016. Retrieved 11 June 2014.

^ Rania Moussly, Staff Reporter (10 February 2012). "Blacklist seeks to deter Emirati job aspirants from being fussy". gulfnews.com. Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 21 August 2015.

^ a b "Building Towers, Cheating Workers Section V." Human Rights Watch. 11 November 2006. Archived from the original on 11 May 2012. Retrieved 26 July 2010.

^ "Dark side of the Dubai dream". BBC. 6 April 2009. Archived from the original on 2 August 2013. Retrieved 15 July 2013.

^ "Behind the Glamorous Facade of the Burj Khalifa". Migrant-Rights.org. 4 January 2010. Archived from the original on 9 May 2012. Retrieved 6 January 2010.

^ "Keeping the Burj Dubai site safe for workers". gulfnews. 4 January 2010. Archived from the original on 8 May 2012. Retrieved 29 May 2011.

^ "Emaar Properties". www.forbes.com. Archived from the original on 21 November 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021.

^ "NYE fireworks at Dubai's Burj Khalifa: How you can get access to Downtown". khaleejtimes.com. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 26 September 2021.

^ "Live broadcast of Burj Khalifa New Year's Eve". gulfnews.com. 28 December 2011. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 20 September 2021.

^ "Emaar bags Guinness World Record title for largest light and sound show on a single building". 6 January 2018. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 29 December 2021.

^ a b "Live broadcast of Burj Khalifa New Year's Eve". www.emirates247.com. 28 December 2011. Archived from the original on 26 October 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021.

^ "Emaar's NYE spectacular was world's most-watched". 4 January 2015. Archived from the original on 20 September 2018. Retrieved 24 October 2021.

^ "Fireworks around the world light the night for New Year's Eve". www.news.com.au. 1 January 2015. Archived from the original on 15 September 2015. Retrieved 26 September 2021.

^ "Dubai's New Year's Eve Burj Khalifa light show to run for months". 1 January 2019. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 22 October 2021.

^ "Largest LED-illuminated façade – Guinness World Records". guinnessworldrecords.com. January 2019. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021.

^ "Tallest LED-illuminated façade – Guinness World Records". guinnessworldrecords.com. January 2019. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2021.

^ "Burj Khalifa and Downtown Dubai bring in 2021 with a spectacular New Year's Eve celebration" (Press release). Archived from the original on 18 August 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2021.

^ "Burj Khalifa and Downtown Dubai bring in 2021 with a spectacular New Year's Eve celebration". 3 January 2021. Archived from the original on 22 September 2021. Retrieved 26 September 2021.

^ Reporter, A. Staff. "New Year 2022 in Dubai: Catch spectacular fireworks, laser show at Burj Khalifa". Khaleej Times. Retrieved 31 December 2024.

^ Bednarz, Jan; Schmidt, Robin; Harvey, Andy; Le Gallou, Hervé (2008). "World record BASE jump". Current Edge. Current TV. Archived from the original on 14 January 2010. Retrieved 4 January 2010.Video documentary about the BASE jump from the Burj Dubai tower.

^ Spender, Tom (24 November 2008). "Daredevils jumped off Burj Dubai undetected". The National. Archived from the original on 10 January 2010. Retrieved 4 January 2010.

^ Highest base jump-Nasr Al Niyadi and Omar Al Hegelan sets world record Archived 13 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 9 January 2010.

^ Mansfield, Roddy (8 January 2010). "Daredevils Jump Off World's Tallest Building". Sky News. Archived from the original on 4 January 2013. Retrieved 8 January 2010.

^ "Highest BASE jump from a building". Guinness World Records Limited. 21 April 2014. Archived from the original on 30 May 2014. Retrieved 19 November 2020.

^ Sampiero, Josh (23 April 2014). "Fred Fugen and Vincent Reffet took BASE jumping higher than ever before in Dubai". Red Bull. Archived from the original on 28 May 2016. Retrieved 19 November 2020.

^ Burj Khalifa Pinnacle BASE Jump – 4K. YouTube. 24 April 2014. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2014.

^ "'Spiderman' Alain Robert scales Burj Khalifa in Dubai". BBC. 28 March 2011. Archived from the original on 1 April 2011. Retrieved 29 March 2011.

^ "CTBUH 9th Annual Awards, 2010". Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat. Archived from the original on 19 June 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2007.

^ "Burj Khalifa won Best Project of Year at Middle East Architect Awards 2010". Constructionweekonline.com. 29 September 2010. Archived from the original on 2 October 2010. Retrieved 30 September 2010.

^ "Burj Khalifa Becomes First Recipient of New Tall Building Global Icon Award". Civil + Structural Engineer. 26 October 2010. Archived from the original on 11 February 2017. Retrieved 8 February 2017.

^ "Burj Khalifa Project Awards". Skidmore, Owings & Merril LLP. Archived from the original on 27 January 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2013.

^ "Jmhdezhdez.com". Burj Khalifa Project Awards. Archived from the original on 15 January 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2013.

External links

Official website
"The Burj Dubai Tower Wind Engineering" (PDF). (597 KB) (Structure magazine, June 2006)
"The Wind Engineering of the Burj Dubai Tower" (PDF). Archived from the original on 14 September 2017.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) (620 KB) (Irwin et al., November 2006)
BBC reports: Burj Khalifa opening, with video and links; Maintaining the world's tallest building
 Geographic data related to Burj Khalifa at OpenStreetMap

vte

Burj Khalifa (828 m)
Marina 101 (425 m)
Princess Tower (414 m)
23 Marina (392.8 m)
Elite Residence (381 m)
Ciel Tower (374 m)
Address Boulevard (370 m)
Almas Tower (360 m)
Gevora Hotel (356 m)
Il Primo Dubai (356 m)
JW Marriott Marquis Dubai (355 m)
Emirates Office Tower (355 m)
The Marina Torch (352 m)

DAMAC Residenze (335 m)
Rose Rayhaan by Rotana (333 m)
Al Yaqoub Tower (328 m)
The Index (326 m)
Burj Al Arab (321 m)
HHHR Tower (318 m)
Ocean Heights (310 m)
Jumeirah Emirates Towers Hotel (309 m)
Amna Tower (307 m)
Noora Tower (307 m)
Cayan Tower (306 m)
One Za'abeel (305 m)
Address Downtown (302 m)

Emirates Crown (296 m)
Khalid Al Attar Tower 2 (294 m)
Sulafa Tower (288 m)
Opera Grand (288 m)
Millennium Tower (285 m)
Al Hekma Tower (282 m)
Marina Pinnacle (280 m)
D1 (277.5 m)
Burj Vista Tower 1 (272 m)
Central Park Towers (270 m)
Radisson Royal Dubai (269 m)
21st Century Tower (269 m)
DAMAC Towers by Paramount Hotels & Resorts (268.1 m)
Al Kazim Towers (265 m)
Ubora Towers (263 m)
Vision Tower (260 m)
Paramount Tower Hotel & Residences (258 m)
Conrad Dubai (255 m)
Dubai Marriott Harbour Hotel & Suites (254 m)
Chelsea Tower (250 m)

Al Tayer Tower (249 m)
Rolex Tower (247 m)
Al Fattan Marine Towers (245 m)
AAM Tower (244 m)
Sama Tower (240 m)
Churchill Residence (235 m)
Burj Daman (235 m)
Park Place (234 m)
Mag 218 Tower (232 m)
Carlton Hotels & Suites (221 m)
Jumeirah Bay (218 m)
Jumeirah Beach Residence (216 m)
Al Seef Towers (215 m)
Grosvenor House (210 m)
Al Rostamani Maze Tower (210 m)
The One Tower (209 m)
Executive Towers (208 m)
Tamani Hotel Marina (207 m)
Dubai Mixed-Use Towers (201 m)
Shangri-La Hotel (200 m)

Al Salam Tecom Tower (195 m)
Concorde Tower (190 m)
Al Sahab Tower 1 (187 m)
Dubai World Trade Centre (184 m)
Armada Tower 2 (167 m)
Four Points by Sheraton Sheikh Zayed Road, Dubai (167 m)
Sky Gardens (160 m)
Al Attar Business Tower (158 m)
World Trade Centre Residence (158 m)

Jumeirah Lake Towers
Marina 1
The Residences

vte

Iconic Tower

Gran Torre Santiago

Torres Obispado

1 Manhattan West
111 West 57th Street
3 World Trade Center
30 Hudson Yards
35 Hudson Yards
432 Park Avenue
50 Hudson Yards
53W53
875 North Michigan Avenue
Aon Center
Bank of America Plaza
Bank of America Tower
Central Park Tower
Chrysler Building
Comcast Technology Center
Empire State Building
Franklin Center
JPMorgan Chase Tower
One57
One Vanderbilt
One World Trade Center
Salesforce Tower
St. Regis Chicago
The Brooklyn Tower
The New York Times Building
The Spiral
Trump International Hotel and Tower
Two Prudential Plaza
U.S. Bank Tower
Wells Fargo Plaza
Willis Tower
Wilshire Grand Center
World Trade Center (1973–2001) †

Baoneng Center
Changsha A9 Financial District
Changsha IFS Tower T1
China Resources Headquarters
China World Trade Center Tower III
China Zun
Chongqing IFS T1
Chongqing World Financial Center
CITIC Plaza
Citymark Centre
Dalian International Trade Center
Diwang International Fortune Center
Dongguan International Trade Center 1
East Pacific Center
Eton Place Dalian
Fortune Center
Gate to the East
Greenland Hangzhou Center
Golden Eagle Tiandi Tower A
Golden Eagle Tiandi Tower B
Greenland Puli Center
Guangxi China Resources Tower
Guangzhou CTF Finance Centre
Guangzhou International Finance Center
Guiyang International Financial Center Tower 1
Hanking Center
Heartland 66 Office Tower
Hengqin International Finance Center
Hon Kwok City Center
Huachuang International Plaza
Huaguoyuan Tower 1
Huaguoyuan Tower 2
Huijin Center Guangzhou
Jiangxi Nanchang Greenland Central Plaza
Jin Mao Tower
Jin Wan Plaza 9
Jinan Center Financial City
KK100
Leatop Plaza
Logan Century Center 1
Longxi International Hotel
Minsheng Bank Building
Nanjing International Youth Cultural Centre Tower 1
One Shenzhen Bay
Pearl River Tower
Ping An International Finance Centre
The Pinnacle
Poly Pazhou
Riverview Plaza
Shanghai Tower
Shanghai World Financial Center
Shenglong Global Center
Shenzhen Center
Shenzhen CFC Changfu Centre
Shimao Hunan Center
Shimao International Plaza
Shum Yip Upperhills Tower 1
Shun Hing Square
Spring City 66
Suning Plaza 1, Wuxi
Suning Plaza Tower 1, Zhenjiang
Suzhou IFS
Tianjin CTF Finance Centre
Tianjin Modern City Office Tower
Tianjin World Financial Center
Wanda Plaza
Wenzhou World Trade Center
White Magnolia Plaza
Wuhan Center
Wuhan Greenland Center
Wuhan Yangtze River Shipping Center
Wuxi IFS
Wuxi Maoye City – Marriott Hotel
Xi'an Glory International Financial Center
Xiangjiang Fortune Finance Center
Yantai Shimao No.1 The Harbour
Yuexiu Fortune Center Tower 1
Zhongzhou Holdings Financial Center
Zhuhai Tower
Zhujiang New City Tower
Zifeng Tower

Bank of China Tower
Central Plaza
International Commerce Centre
International Finance Centre
Nina Tower
The Center

Abeno Harukas
Azabudai Hills Mori JP Tower

Abu Dhabi Plaza

Al Hamra Tower
Arraya Tower

The Exchange 106
Four Seasons Place Kuala Lumpur
Merdeka 118
Petronas Towers
Telekom Tower

Metrobank Center

Aspire Tower
Lusail Plaza Towers 3 and 4

The Clock Towers
Kingdom Centre
PIF Tower

Haeundae Doosan We've the Zenith
Haeundae LCT The Sharp
Lotte World Tower
Parc1
Posco Tower-Songdo

85 Sky Tower
Taipei 101

Baiyoke Tower II
ICONSIAM
MahaNakhon

CBRT Tower

23 Marina
Address Boulevard
Address Downtown
ADNOC Headquarters
Almas Tower
Amna Tower
Burj Al Arab
Burj Khalifa
Cayan Tower
DAMAC Residenze
Elite Residence
Emirates Office Tower
Etihad Towers
Gevora Hotel
HHHR Tower
Il Primo Dubai
The Index
Jumeirah Emirates Towers Hotel
JW Marriott Marquis Dubai
The Landmark
Marina 101
The Marina Torch
Ocean Heights
Princess Tower
Rose Tower
World Trade Center Abu Dhabi

Keangnam Hanoi Landmark Tower
Landmark 81

Varso Tower

City of Capitals
Eurasia
Federation Tower
Lakhta Center
Mercury City Tower
Neva Towers 2
OKO Tower

The Shard

Australia 108
Q1 Tower

† No longer standing.

Ethiopian Electric Power Headquarters

Tour F

Chongqing Corporate Avenue 1
Evergrande Center
Eye of Spring Trade Center
Greenland Group Suzhou Center
Haikou Tower
Nanjing World Trade Center Tower 1
Ningbo Center
North Bund Centre
Shandong IFC
South Asian Gate
Suzhou Zhongnan Center
Tianshan Gate of the World Plots 27 and 28
Wuhan CTF Finance Center
Xi'an Greenland Center
Xiamen International Centre
Xiangmi Lake New Financial Center

Burj Azizi
Highwealth Huiguo 90
Jeddah Tower
Legacy Tower
One Bangkok
Taipei Twin Towers
Thamrin Nine
Torch Tower

270 Park Avenue
520 Fifth Avenue
Concord Sky
SkyTower at Pinnacle One Yonge
The One
Waldorf Astoria Miami

Senna Tower

2 World Trade Center
45 Broad Street
Baoneng Shenyang Global Financial Center
Busan Lotte Town Tower
Chengdu Greenland Tower
Chongqing Tall Tower
Dalian Greenland Center
Diamond Tower (Jeddah)
Dubai Pearl
Dubai Towers Doha
Forum 66
Gate of Kuwait
Goldin Finance 117
Hyundai Global Business Center
Lamar Towers
Mandarin Oriental Chengdu
Marina 106
Namaste Tower
Nanjing Olympic Suning Tower
One Tower
Palais Royale, Mumbai
Pentominium
Runhua Global Center 1
Ryugyong Hotel
Sino-Steel Tower
Skycity
Square Capital Tower
The Stratford Residences
Tameer Commercial Tower
Tianjin R&F Guangdong Tower
Tour Financial Hub Center
Tower Infinity
VietinBank Business Center Office Tower

vte

Ain Dubai
Al Bastakiya
Al Fahidi Fort
Atlantis, The Palm
Atlantis The Royal
Burj Al Arab
Burj Khalifa
Deep Dive Dubai
Deira Clocktower
Dubai Autodrome
Dubai Butterfly Garden
Dubai Dolphinarium
Dubai Fountain
Dubai Frame
Dubai Gold Souk
The Dubai Mall
Dubai Marina
Dubai Marina Mall
Dubai Miracle Garden
Dubai Opera
Dubai Parks and Resorts
Dubai Spice Souk
Dubai Textile Souk
Dubai Trolley
Dubai World Trade Centre
Emirates Towers
Global Village
Hatta Heritage Village
Heritage Village Dubai
Hyatt Regency Dubai
Jumeirah Beach
Jumeirah Beach Hotel
Madame Tussauds Dubai
Madinat Jumeirah
Museum of the Future
National Bank of Dubai
One Za'abeel
Orbi Dubai
Palm Islands
Queen Elizabeth 2
Real Madrid Resort Island
Real Madrid World
Saeed Al Maktoum House
Ski Dubai
Waterfront Market
Wild Wadi
The World
Zabeel Park

United Arab Emirates portal

VIAF

GermanyUnited States

Structurae

25°11′50″N 55°16′27″E﻿ / ﻿25.19722°N 55.27417°E﻿ / 25.19722; 55.27417

