Nuclear explosion
History
Warfare
Design
Testing
Delivery
Yield

Effects
Workers
Ethics

Arsenals
Target selection
Arms race
Blackmail
Deterrence
Espionage
Proliferation
Disarmament
Sharing
Strategy
Terrorism
Umbrella
Opposition
Winter
Pax Atomica

vte

Biological
Chemical
Nuclear
Radiological

Albania
Algeria
Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Egypt
France
Germany
India
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Italy
Japan
Kazakhstan
Libya
Mexico
Myanmar
Netherlands
North Korea
Pakistan
Philippines
Poland
Rhodesia
Romania
Russia (Soviet Union)
Saudi Arabia
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Yugoslavia

Chemical
Nuclear
Missiles

List of treaties (treaty parties)

Category

vte

A nuclear weapon[a] is an explosive device that derives its destructive force from nuclear reactions, either fission (fission or atomic bomb) or a combination of fission and fusion reactions (thermonuclear weapon[b]), producing a nuclear explosion. Both bomb types release large quantities of energy from relatively small amounts of matter.

Nuclear bombs have had yields between 10 tons (the W54) and 50 megatons for the Tsar Bomba (see TNT equivalent). Yields in the low kilotons can devastate cities. A thermonuclear weapon weighing as little as 600 pounds (270 kg) can release energy equal to more than 1.2 megatons of TNT (5.0 PJ).[1] Apart from the blast, effects of nuclear weapons include firestorms, extreme heat and ionizing radiation, radioactive nuclear fallout, an electromagnetic pulse, and a radar blackout.

The first nuclear weapons were developed by the Allied Manhattan Project during World War II. Their production continues to require a large scientific and industrial complex, primarily for the production of fissile material, either from nuclear reactors and nuclear reprocessing plants or from enrichment facilities. Nuclear weapons have been used twice in war, both times by the United States against the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945. Nuclear deterrence, sometimes based on mutually assured destruction, aims to prevent nuclear warfare through the potential to inflict unacceptable damage, including the danger of uncontrolled escalation to nuclear holocaust. A nuclear arms race for weapons and their delivery systems was a defining component of the Cold War.

Strategic nuclear weapons are targeted against civilian, industrial, and military infrastructure, while tactical nuclear weapons are intended for battlefield use. Strategic weapons led to the development of dedicated intercontinental ballistic missiles, submarine-launched ballistic missile, and nuclear strategic bombers, collectively known as the nuclear triad. Tactical weapons options have included shorter-range ground-, air-, and sea-launched missiles, nuclear artillery, nuclear land mines, nuclear torpedoes, and nuclear depth charges, but they have become less salient since the end of the Cold War.

As of 2025[update], nine countries possess nuclear weapons and delivery systems, and six more agree to nuclear sharing. Nuclear weapons are weapons of mass destruction, and their control is a focus of international security through measures to prevent their proliferation, limit their numbers, or eliminate them altogether. Key international agreements and organizations include the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and Organization, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, and Nuclear-weapon-free zones.

Nuclear weapons testing is used to validate and improve designs and to understand the effects of nuclear explosions. Between 1945 and 2017, over 2,000 tests were conducted, ranging from fully weaponized to experimental designs. A science-based stockpile stewardship is usually adopted by countries that have ceased testing.

Testing and deployment

Nuclear weapons have only twice been used in warfare, both times by the United States against Japan at the end of World War II. On August 6, 1945, the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) detonated a uranium gun-type fission bomb nicknamed "Little Boy" over the Japanese city of Hiroshima; three days later, on August 9, the USAAF[2] detonated a plutonium implosion-type fission bomb nicknamed "Fat Man" over the Japanese city of Nagasaki. These bombings caused injuries that resulted in the deaths of approximately 200,000 civilians and military personnel.[3] The ethics of these bombings and their role in Japan's surrender are to this day, still subjects of debate.

Since the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, nuclear weapons have been detonated over 2,000 times for testing and demonstration. Only a few nations possess such weapons or are suspected of seeking them. The only countries known to have detonated nuclear weapons—and acknowledge possessing them—are (chronologically by date of first test) the United States, the Soviet Union (succeeded as a nuclear power by Russia), the United Kingdom, France, China, India, Pakistan, and North Korea. Israel is believed to possess nuclear weapons, though, in a policy of deliberate ambiguity, it does not acknowledge having them. Germany, Italy, Turkey, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Belarus are nuclear weapons sharing states.[4][5][c] South Africa is the only country to have independently developed and then renounced and dismantled its nuclear weapons.[6]

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons aims to reduce the spread of nuclear weapons, but there are different views of its effectiveness.[7]

Types

There are two basic types of nuclear weapons: those that derive the majority of their energy from nuclear fission reactions alone, and those that use fission reactions to begin nuclear fusion reactions that produce a large amount of the total energy output.[9]

Fission weapons

All existing nuclear weapons derive some of their explosive energy from nuclear fission reactions. Weapons whose explosive output is exclusively from fission reactions are commonly referred to as atomic bombs or atom bombs (abbreviated as A-bombs). This has long been noted as something of a misnomer, as their energy comes from the nucleus of the atom, just as it does with fusion weapons.

In fission weapons, a mass of fissile material (enriched uranium or plutonium) is forced into supercriticality—allowing an exponential growth of nuclear chain reactions—either by shooting one piece of sub-critical material into another (the "gun" method) or by compression of a sub-critical sphere or cylinder of fissile material using chemically fueled explosive lenses. The latter approach, the "implosion" method, is more sophisticated and more efficient (smaller, less massive, and requiring less of the expensive fissile fuel) than the former.

A major challenge in all nuclear weapon designs is to ensure that a significant fraction of the fuel is consumed before the weapon destroys itself. The amount of energy released by fission bombs can range from the equivalent of just under a ton to upwards of 500,000 tons (500 kilotons) of TNT (4.2 to 2.1×106 GJ).[10]

All fission reactions generate fission products, the remains of the split atomic nuclei. Many fission products are either highly radioactive (but short-lived) or moderately radioactive (but long-lived), and as such, they are a serious form of radioactive contamination. Fission products are the principal radioactive component of nuclear fallout. Another source of radioactivity is the burst of free neutrons produced by the weapon. When they collide with other nuclei in the surrounding material, the neutrons transmute those nuclei into other isotopes, altering their stability and making them radioactive.

The most commonly used fissile materials for nuclear weapons applications have been uranium-235 and plutonium-239. Less commonly used has been uranium-233. Neptunium-237 and some isotopes of americium may be usable for nuclear explosives as well, but it is not clear that this has ever been implemented, and their plausible use in nuclear weapons is a matter of dispute.[11]

Fusion weapons

The other basic type of nuclear weapon produces a large proportion of its energy in nuclear fusion reactions. Such fusion weapons are generally referred to as thermonuclear weapons or more colloquially as hydrogen bombs (abbreviated as H-bombs), as they rely on fusion reactions between isotopes of hydrogen (deuterium and tritium). All such weapons derive a significant portion of their energy from fission reactions used to "trigger" fusion reactions, and fusion reactions can themselves trigger additional fission reactions.[12]

Only six countries—the United States, Russia, the United Kingdom, China, France, and India—have conducted thermonuclear weapon tests. Whether India has detonated a "true" multi-staged thermonuclear weapon is controversial.[13] North Korea claims to have tested a fusion weapon as of January 2016[update], though this claim is disputed.[14] Thermonuclear weapons are considered much more difficult to successfully design and execute than primitive fission weapons. Almost all of the nuclear weapons deployed today use the thermonuclear design because it results in an explosion hundreds of times stronger than that of a fission bomb of similar weight.[15]

Thermonuclear bombs work by using the energy of a fission bomb to compress and heat fusion fuel. In the Teller-Ulam design, which accounts for all multi-megaton yield hydrogen bombs, this is accomplished by placing a fission bomb and fusion fuel (tritium, deuterium, or lithium deuteride) in proximity within a special, radiation-reflecting container. When the fission bomb is detonated, gamma rays and X-rays emitted first compress the fusion fuel, then heat it to thermonuclear temperatures. The ensuing fusion reaction creates enormous numbers of high-speed neutrons, which can then induce fission in materials not normally prone to it, such as depleted uranium. Each of these components is known as a "stage", with the fission bomb as the "primary" and the fusion capsule as the "secondary". In large, megaton-range hydrogen bombs, about half of the yield comes from the final fissioning of depleted uranium.[10]

Virtually all thermonuclear weapons deployed today use the "two-stage" design described to the right, but it is possible to add additional fusion stages—each stage igniting a larger amount of fusion fuel in the next stage. This technique can be used to construct thermonuclear weapons of arbitrarily large yield. This is in contrast to fission bombs, which are limited in their explosive power due to criticality danger (premature nuclear chain reaction caused by too-large amounts of pre-assembled fissile fuel). The largest nuclear weapon ever detonated, the Tsar Bomba of the USSR, which released an energy equivalent of over 50 megatons of TNT (210 PJ), was a three-stage weapon. Most thermonuclear weapons are considerably smaller than this, due to practical constraints from missile warhead space and weight requirements.[16] In the early 1950s the Livermore Laboratory in the United States had plans for the testing of two massive bombs, Gnomon and Sundial, 1 gigaton of TNT and 10 gigatons of TNT respectively.[17][18]

Fusion reactions do not create fission products, and thus contribute far less to the creation of nuclear fallout than fission reactions, but because all thermonuclear weapons contain at least one fission stage, and many high-yield thermonuclear devices have a final fission stage, thermonuclear weapons can generate at least as much nuclear fallout as fission-only weapons. Furthermore, high yield thermonuclear explosions (most dangerously ground bursts) have the force to lift radioactive debris upwards past the tropopause into the stratosphere, where the calm non-turbulent winds permit the debris to travel great distances from the burst, eventually settling and unpredictably contaminating areas far removed from the target of the explosion.

Other types

There are other types of nuclear weapons as well. For example, a boosted fission weapon is a fission bomb that increases its explosive yield through a small number of fusion reactions, but it is not a fusion bomb. In the boosted bomb, the neutrons produced by the fusion reactions serve primarily to increase the efficiency of the fission bomb. There are two types of boosted fission bomb: internally boosted, in which a deuterium-tritium mixture is injected into the bomb core, and externally boosted, in which concentric shells of lithium-deuteride and depleted uranium are layered on the outside of the fission bomb core. The external method of boosting enabled the USSR to field the first partially thermonuclear weapons, but it is now obsolete because it demands a spherical bomb geometry, which was adequate during the 1950s arms race when bomber aircraft were the only available delivery vehicles.

The detonation of any nuclear weapon is accompanied by a blast of neutron radiation. Surrounding a nuclear weapon with suitable materials (such as cobalt or gold) creates a weapon known as a salted bomb. This device can produce exceptionally large quantities of long-lived radioactive contamination. It has been conjectured that such a device could serve as a "doomsday weapon" because such a large quantity of radioactivities with half-lives of decades, lifted into the stratosphere where winds would distribute it around the globe, would make all life on the planet extinct.

In connection with the Strategic Defense Initiative, research into the nuclear pumped laser was conducted under the DOD program Project Excalibur but this did not result in a working weapon. The concept involves the tapping of the energy of an exploding nuclear bomb to power a single-shot laser that is directed at a distant target.

During the Starfish Prime high-altitude nuclear test in 1962, an unexpected effect was produced which is called a nuclear electromagnetic pulse. This is an intense flash of electromagnetic energy produced by a rain of high-energy electrons which in turn are produced by a nuclear bomb's gamma rays. This flash of energy can permanently destroy or disrupt electronic equipment if insufficiently shielded. It has been proposed to use this effect to disable an enemy's military and civilian infrastructure as an adjunct to other nuclear or conventional military operations. By itself it could as well be useful to terrorists for crippling a nation's economic electronics-based infrastructure. Because the effect is most effectively produced by high altitude nuclear detonations (by military weapons delivered by air, though ground bursts also produce EMP effects over a localized area), it can produce damage to electronics over a wide, even continental, geographical area.[19]

Research has been done into the possibility of pure fusion bombs: nuclear weapons that consist of fusion reactions without requiring a fission bomb to initiate them. Such a device might provide a simpler path to thermonuclear weapons than one that required the development of fission weapons first, and pure fusion weapons would create significantly less nuclear fallout than other thermonuclear weapons because they would not disperse fission products. In 1998, the United States Department of Energy divulged that the United States had, "...made a substantial investment" in the past to develop pure fusion weapons, but that, "The U.S. does not have and is not developing a pure fusion weapon", and that, "No credible design for a pure fusion weapon resulted from the DOE investment".[20]

Nuclear isomers provide a possible pathway to fissionless fusion bombs. These are naturally occurring isotopes (178m2Hf being a prominent example) which exist in an elevated energy state. Mechanisms to release this energy as bursts of gamma radiation (as in the hafnium controversy) have been proposed as possible triggers for conventional thermonuclear reactions.

Antimatter, which consists of particles resembling ordinary matter particles in most of their properties but having opposite electric charge, has been considered as a trigger mechanism for nuclear weapons.[21][22][23] A major obstacle is the difficulty of producing antimatter in large enough quantities, and there is no evidence that it is feasible beyond the military domain.[24] However, the US Air Force funded studies of the physics of antimatter in the Cold War, and began considering its possible use in weapons, not just as a trigger, but as the explosive itself.[25] A fourth generation nuclear weapon design[21] is related to, and relies upon, the same principle as antimatter-catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion.[26]

Most variation in nuclear weapon design is for the purpose of achieving different yields for different situations, and in manipulating design elements to attempt to minimize weapon size,[10] radiation hardness or requirements for special materials, especially fissile fuel or tritium.

Some nuclear weapons are designed for special purposes; most of these are for non-strategic (decisively war-winning) purposes and are referred to as tactical nuclear weapons.

The neutron bomb purportedly conceived by Sam Cohen is a thermonuclear weapon that yields a relatively small explosion but a relatively large amount of neutron radiation. Such a weapon could, according to tacticians, be used to cause massive biological casualties while leaving inanimate infrastructure mostly intact and creating minimal fallout. Because high energy neutrons are capable of penetrating dense matter, such as tank armor, neutron warheads were procured in the 1980s (though not deployed in Europe) for use as tactical payloads for US Army artillery shells (200 mm W79 and 155 mm W82) and short range missile forces. Soviet authorities announced similar intentions for neutron warhead deployment in Europe; indeed, they claimed to have originally invented the neutron bomb, but their deployment on USSR tactical nuclear forces is unverifiable.[citation needed]

A type of nuclear explosive most suitable for use by ground special forces was the Special Atomic Demolition Munition, or SADM, sometimes popularly known as a suitcase nuke. This is a nuclear bomb that is man-portable, or at least truck-portable, and though of a relatively small yield (one or two kilotons) is sufficient to destroy important tactical targets such as bridges, dams, tunnels, important military or commercial installations, etc. either behind enemy lines or pre-emptively on friendly territory soon to be overtaken by invading enemy forces. These weapons require plutonium fuel and are particularly "dirty". They also demand especially stringent security precautions in their storage and deployment.[citation needed]

Small "tactical" nuclear weapons were deployed for use as antiaircraft weapons. Examples include the USAF AIR-2 Genie, the AIM-26 Falcon and US Army Nike Hercules. Missile interceptors such as the Sprint and the Spartan also used small nuclear warheads (optimized to produce neutron or X-ray flux) but were for use against enemy strategic warheads.[citation needed]

Other small, or tactical, nuclear weapons were deployed by naval forces for use primarily as antisubmarine weapons. These included nuclear depth bombs or nuclear armed torpedoes. Nuclear mines for use on land or at sea are also possibilities.[citation needed]

Weapons delivery

The system used to deliver a nuclear weapon to its target is an important factor affecting both nuclear weapon design and nuclear strategy. The design, development, and maintenance of delivery systems are among the most expensive parts of a nuclear weapons program; they account, for example, for 57% of the financial resources spent by the United States on nuclear weapons projects since 1940.[27]

The simplest method for delivering a nuclear weapon is a gravity bomb dropped from aircraft; this was the method used by the United States against Japan in 1945. This method places few restrictions on the size of the weapon. It does, however, limit attack range, response time to an impending attack, and the number of weapons that a country can field at the same time. With miniaturization, nuclear bombs can be delivered by both strategic bombers and tactical fighter-bombers. This method is the primary means of nuclear weapons delivery; the majority of US nuclear warheads, for example, are free-fall gravity bombs, namely the B61, which is being improved upon to this day.[10][28]

Preferable from a strategic point of view is a nuclear weapon mounted on a missile, which can use a ballistic trajectory to deliver the warhead over the horizon. Although even short-range missiles allow for a faster and less vulnerable attack, the development of long-range intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) has given some nations the ability to plausibly deliver missiles anywhere on the globe with a high likelihood of success.

More advanced systems, such as multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles (MIRVs), can launch multiple warheads at different targets from one missile, reducing the chance of a successful missile defense. Today, missiles are most common among systems designed for delivery of nuclear weapons. Making a warhead small enough to fit onto a missile, though, can be difficult.[10]

Tactical weapons have involved the most variety of delivery types, including not only gravity bombs and missiles but also artillery shells, land mines, and nuclear depth charges and torpedoes for anti-submarine warfare. An atomic mortar has been tested by the United States. Small, two-man portable tactical weapons (somewhat misleadingly referred to as suitcase bombs), such as the Special Atomic Demolition Munition, have been developed, although the difficulty of combining sufficient yield with portability limits their military utility.[10]

Nuclear strategy

Nuclear warfare strategy is a set of policies that deal with preventing or fighting a nuclear war. The policy of trying to prevent an attack by a nuclear weapon from another country by threatening nuclear retaliation is known as the strategy of nuclear deterrence. The goal in deterrence is to always maintain a second strike capability (the ability of a country to respond to a nuclear attack with one of its own) and potentially to strive for first strike status (the ability to destroy an enemy's nuclear forces before they could retaliate). During the Cold War, policy and military theorists considered the sorts of policies that might prevent a nuclear attack, and they developed game theory models that could lead to stable deterrence conditions.[29]

Different forms of nuclear weapons delivery (see above) allow for different types of nuclear strategies. The goals of any strategy are generally to make it difficult for an enemy to launch a pre-emptive strike against the weapon system and difficult to defend against the delivery of the weapon during a potential conflict. This can mean keeping weapon locations hidden, such as deploying them on submarines or land mobile transporter erector launchers whose locations are difficult to track, or it can mean protecting weapons by burying them in hardened missile silo bunkers. Other components of nuclear strategies included using missile defenses to destroy the missiles before they land or implementing civil defense measures using early-warning systems to evacuate citizens to safe areas before an attack.

Weapons designed to threaten large populations or to deter attacks are known as strategic weapons. Nuclear weapons for use on a battlefield in military situations are called tactical weapons.

Critics of nuclear war strategy often suggest that a nuclear war between two nations would result in mutual annihilation. From this point of view, the significance of nuclear weapons is to deter war because any nuclear war would escalate out of mutual distrust and fear, resulting in mutually assured destruction. This threat of national, if not global, destruction has been a strong motivation for anti-nuclear weapons activism.

Critics from the peace movement and within the military establishment[citation needed] have questioned the usefulness of such weapons in the current military climate. According to an advisory opinion issued by the International Court of Justice in 1996, the use of (or threat of use of) such weapons would generally be contrary to the rules of international law applicable in armed conflict, but the court did not reach an opinion as to whether or not the threat or use would be lawful in specific extreme circumstances such as if the survival of the state were at stake.

Another deterrence position is that nuclear proliferation can be desirable. In this case, it is argued that, unlike conventional weapons, nuclear weapons deter all-out war between states, and they succeeded in doing this during the Cold War between the US and the Soviet Union.[30] In the late 1950s and early 1960s, Gen. Pierre Marie Gallois of France, an adviser to Charles de Gaulle, argued in books like The Balance of Terror: Strategy for the Nuclear Age (1961) that mere possession of a nuclear arsenal was enough to ensure deterrence, and thus concluded that the spread of nuclear weapons could increase international stability. Some prominent neo-realist scholars, such as Kenneth Waltz and John Mearsheimer, have argued, along the lines of Gallois, that some forms of nuclear proliferation would decrease the likelihood of total war, especially in troubled regions of the world where there exists a single nuclear-weapon state. Aside from the public opinion that opposes proliferation in any form, there are two schools of thought on the matter: those, like Mearsheimer, who favored selective proliferation,[31] and Waltz, who was somewhat more non-interventionist.[32][33] Interest in proliferation and the stability-instability paradox that it generates continues to this day, with ongoing debate about indigenous Japanese and South Korean nuclear deterrent against North Korea.[34]

The threat of potentially suicidal terrorists possessing nuclear weapons (a form of nuclear terrorism) complicates the decision process. The prospect of mutually assured destruction might not deter an enemy who expects to die in the confrontation. Further, if the initial act is from a stateless terrorist instead of a sovereign nation, there might not be a nation or specific target to retaliate against. It has been argued, especially after the September 11, 2001, attacks, that this complication calls for a new nuclear strategy, one that is distinct from that which gave relative stability during the Cold War.[35] Since 1996, the United States has had a policy of allowing the targeting of its nuclear weapons at terrorists armed with weapons of mass destruction.[36]

Robert Gallucci argues that although traditional deterrence is not an effective approach toward terrorist groups bent on causing a nuclear catastrophe, Gallucci believes that "the United States should instead consider a policy of expanded deterrence, which focuses not solely on the would-be nuclear terrorists but on those states that may deliberately transfer or inadvertently leak nuclear weapons and materials to them. By threatening retaliation against those states, the United States may be able to deter that which it cannot physically prevent.".[37]

Graham Allison makes a similar case, arguing that the key to expanded deterrence is coming up with ways of tracing nuclear material to the country that forged the fissile material. "After a nuclear bomb detonates, nuclear forensics cops would collect debris samples and send them to a laboratory for radiological analysis. By identifying unique attributes of the fissile material, including its impurities and contaminants, one could trace the path back to its origin."[38] The process is analogous to identifying a criminal by fingerprints. "The goal would be twofold: first, to deter leaders of nuclear states from selling weapons to terrorists by holding them accountable for any use of their weapons; second, to give leaders every incentive to tightly secure their nuclear weapons and materials."[38]

According to the Pentagon's June 2019 "Doctrine for Joint Nuclear Operations" of the Joint Chiefs of Staffs website Publication, "Integration of nuclear weapons employment with conventional and special operations forces is essential to the success of any mission or operation."[39][40]

Governance, control, and law

Because they are weapons of mass destruction, the proliferation and possible use of nuclear weapons are important issues in international relations and diplomacy. In most countries, the use of nuclear force can only be authorized by the head of government or head of state.[d] Despite controls and regulations governing nuclear weapons, there is an inherent danger of "accidents, mistakes, false alarms, blackmail, theft, and sabotage".[41]

In the late 1940s, lack of mutual trust prevented the United States and the Soviet Union from making progress on arms control agreements. The Russell–Einstein Manifesto was issued in London on July 9, 1955, by Bertrand Russell in the midst of the Cold War. It highlighted the dangers posed by nuclear weapons and called for world leaders to seek peaceful resolutions to international conflict. The signatories included eleven pre-eminent intellectuals and scientists, including Albert Einstein, who signed it just days before his death on April 18, 1955. A few days after the release, philanthropist Cyrus S. Eaton offered to sponsor a conference—called for in the manifesto—in Pugwash, Nova Scotia, Eaton's birthplace. This conference was to be the first of the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs, held in July 1957.

By the 1960s, steps were taken to limit both the proliferation of nuclear weapons to other countries and the environmental effects of nuclear testing. The Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (1963) restricted all nuclear testing to underground nuclear testing, to prevent contamination from nuclear fallout, whereas the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (1968) attempted to place restrictions on the types of activities signatories could participate in, with the goal of allowing the transference of non-military nuclear technology to member countries without fear of proliferation.

In 1957, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was established under the mandate of the United Nations to encourage development of peaceful applications of nuclear technology, provide international safeguards against its misuse, and facilitate the application of safety measures in its use. In 1996, many nations signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,[42] which prohibits all testing of nuclear weapons. A testing ban imposes a significant hindrance to nuclear arms development by any complying country.[43] The Treaty requires the ratification by 44 specific states before it can go into force; as of 2012[update], the ratification of eight of these states is still required.[42]

Additional treaties and agreements have governed nuclear weapons stockpiles between the countries with the two largest stockpiles, the United States and the Soviet Union, and later between the United States and Russia. These include treaties such as SALT II (never ratified), START I (expired), INF, START II (never in effect), SORT, and New START, as well as non-binding agreements such as SALT I and the Presidential Nuclear Initiatives[44] of 1991. Even when they did not enter into force, these agreements helped limit and later reduce the numbers and types of nuclear weapons between the United States and the Soviet Union/Russia.

Nuclear weapons have also been opposed by agreements between countries. Many nations have been declared Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones, areas where nuclear weapons production and deployment are prohibited, through the use of treaties. The Treaty of Tlatelolco (1967) prohibited any production or deployment of nuclear weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, and the Treaty of Pelindaba (1964) prohibits nuclear weapons in many African countries. As recently as 2006 a Central Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone was established among the former Soviet republics of Central Asia prohibiting nuclear weapons.

In 1996, the International Court of Justice, the highest court of the United Nations, issued an Advisory Opinion concerned with the "Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons". The court ruled that the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would violate various articles of international law, including the Geneva Conventions, the Hague Conventions, the UN Charter, and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Given the unique, destructive characteristics of nuclear weapons, the International Committee of the Red Cross calls on States to ensure that these weapons are never used, irrespective of whether they consider them lawful or not.[45]

Additionally, there have been other, specific actions meant to discourage countries from developing nuclear arms. In the wake of the tests by India and Pakistan in 1998, economic sanctions were (temporarily) levied against both countries, though neither were signatories with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. One of the stated casus belli for the initiation of the 2003 Iraq War was an accusation by the United States that Iraq was actively pursuing nuclear arms (though this was soon discovered not to be the case as the program had been discontinued). In 1981, Israel had bombed a nuclear reactor being constructed in Osirak, Iraq, in what it called an attempt to halt Iraq's previous nuclear arms ambitions; in 2007, Israel bombed another reactor being constructed in Syria.

In 2013, Mark Diesendorf said that governments of France, India, North Korea, Pakistan, UK, and South Africa have used nuclear power or research reactors to assist nuclear weapons development or to contribute to their supplies of nuclear explosives from military reactors.[46] In 2017, 122 countries mainly in the Global South voted in favor of adopting the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which eventually entered into force in 2021.[47]

The Doomsday Clock measures the likelihood of a human-made global catastrophe and is published annually by the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. The two years with the highest likelihood had previously been 1953, when the Clock was set to two minutes until midnight after the US and the Soviet Union began testing hydrogen bombs, and 2018, following the failure of world leaders to address tensions relating to nuclear weapons and climate change issues.[48] In 2023, following the escalation of nuclear threats during the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the doomsday clock was set to 90 seconds, the highest likelihood of global catastrophe since the existence of the Doomsday Clock.[49]

As of 2024, Russia has intensified nuclear threats in Ukraine and is reportedly planning to place nuclear weapons in orbit, breaching the 1967 Outer Space Treaty. China is significantly expanding its nuclear arsenal, with projections of over 1,000 warheads by 2030 and up to 1,500 by 2035. North Korea is progressing in intercontinental ballistic missile tests and has a mutual-defense treaty with Russia, exchanging artillery for possible missile technology. Iran is currently viewed as a nuclear "threshold" state.[50]

Disarmament

Nuclear disarmament refers to both the act of reducing or eliminating nuclear weapons and to the end state of a nuclear-free world, in which nuclear weapons are eliminated.

Beginning with the 1963 Partial Test Ban Treaty and continuing through the 1996 Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, there have been many treaties to limit or reduce nuclear weapons testing and stockpiles. The 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty has as one of its explicit conditions that all signatories must "pursue negotiations in good faith" towards the long-term goal of "complete disarmament". The nuclear-weapon states have largely treated that aspect of the agreement as "decorative" and without force.[51]

Only one country—South Africa—has ever fully renounced nuclear weapons they had independently developed. The former Soviet republics of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine returned Soviet nuclear arms stationed in their countries to Russia after the collapse of the USSR.

Proponents of nuclear disarmament say that it would lessen the probability of nuclear war, especially accidentally. Critics of nuclear disarmament say that it would undermine the present nuclear peace and deterrence and would lead to increased global instability. Various American elder statesmen,[52] who were in office during the Cold War period, have been advocating the elimination of nuclear weapons. These officials include Henry Kissinger, George Shultz, Sam Nunn, and William Perry. In January 2010, Lawrence M. Krauss stated that "no issue carries more importance to the long-term health and security of humanity than the effort to reduce, and perhaps one day, rid the world of nuclear weapons".[53]

In January 1986, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev publicly proposed a three-stage program for abolishing the world's nuclear weapons by the end of the 20th century.[54] In the years after the end of the Cold War, there have been numerous campaigns to urge the abolition of nuclear weapons, such as that organized by the Global Zero movement, and the goal of a "world without nuclear weapons" was advocated by United States President Barack Obama in an April 2009 speech in Prague.[55] A CNN poll from April 2010 indicated that the American public was nearly evenly split on the issue.[56]

Some analysts have argued that nuclear weapons have made the world relatively safer, with peace through deterrence and through the stability–instability paradox, including in south Asia.[57][58] Kenneth Waltz has argued that nuclear weapons have helped keep an uneasy peace, and further nuclear weapon proliferation might even help avoid the large scale conventional wars that were so common before their invention at the end of World War II.[33] But former Secretary Henry Kissinger says there is a new danger, which cannot be addressed by deterrence: "The classical notion of deterrence was that there was some consequences before which aggressors and evildoers would recoil. In a world of suicide bombers, that calculation doesn't operate in any comparable way".[59] George Shultz has said, "If you think of the people who are doing suicide attacks, and people like that get a nuclear weapon, they are almost by definition not deterrable".[60]

As of early 2019, more than 90% of world's 13,865 nuclear weapons were owned by Russia and the United States.[61][62]

United Nations

The UN Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA) is a department of the United Nations Secretariat established in January 1998 as part of the United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan's plan to reform the UN as presented in his report to the General Assembly in July 1997.[63]

Its goal is to promote nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and the strengthening of the disarmament regimes in respect to other weapons of mass destruction, chemical and biological weapons. It also promotes disarmament efforts in the area of conventional weapons, especially land mines and small arms, which are often the weapons of choice in contemporary conflicts.

Controversy

Ethics

Even before the first nuclear weapons had been developed, scientists involved with the Manhattan Project were divided over the use of the weapon. The role of the two atomic bombings of the country in Japan's surrender and the US's ethical justification for them has been the subject of scholarly and popular debate for decades. The question of whether nations should have nuclear weapons, or test them, has been continually and nearly universally controversial.[64]

Notable nuclear weapons accidents

August 21, 1945: While conducting experiments on a plutonium-gallium core at Los Alamos National Laboratory, physicist Harry Daghlian received a lethal dose of radiation when an error caused it to enter prompt criticality. He died 25 days later, on September 15, 1945, from radiation poisoning.[65]
May 21, 1946: While conducting further experiments on the same core at Los Alamos National Laboratory, physicist Louis Slotin accidentally caused the core to become briefly supercritical. He received a lethal dose of gamma and neutron radiation, and died nine days later on May 30, 1946. After the death of Daghlian and Slotin, the mass became known as the "demon core". It was ultimately used to construct a bomb for use on the Nevada Test Range.[66]
February 13, 1950: a Convair B-36B crashed in northern British Columbia after jettisoning a Mark IV atomic bomb. This was the first such nuclear weapon loss in history. The accident was designated a "Broken Arrow"—an accident involving a nuclear weapon, but which does not present a risk of war. Experts believe that up to 50 nuclear weapons were lost during the Cold War.[67]
May 22, 1957: a 42,000-pound (19,000 kg) Mark-17 hydrogen bomb accidentally fell from a bomber near Albuquerque, New Mexico. The detonation of the device's conventional explosives destroyed it on impact and formed a crater 25 feet (7.6 m) in diameter on land owned by the University of New Mexico. According to a researcher at the Natural Resources Defense Council, it was one of the most powerful bombs made to date.[68]
June 7, 1960: the 1960 Fort Dix IM-99 accident destroyed a Boeing CIM-10 Bomarc nuclear missile and shelter and contaminated the BOMARC Missile Accident Site in New Jersey.
January 24, 1961: the 1961 Goldsboro B-52 crash occurred near Goldsboro, North Carolina. A Boeing B-52 Stratofortress carrying two Mark 39 nuclear bombs broke up in mid-air, dropping its nuclear payload in the process.[69]
1965 Philippine Sea A-4 crash, where a Skyhawk attack aircraft with a nuclear weapon fell into the sea.[70] The pilot, the aircraft, and the B43 nuclear bomb were never recovered.[71] It was not until 1989 that the Pentagon revealed the loss of the one-megaton bomb.[72]
January 17, 1966: the 1966 Palomares B-52 crash occurred when a B-52G bomber of the USAF collided with a KC-135 tanker during mid-air refuelling off the coast of Spain. The KC-135 was completely destroyed when its fuel load ignited, killing all four crew members. The B-52G broke apart, killing three of the seven crew members aboard.[73] Of the four Mk28 type hydrogen bombs the B-52G carried,[74] three were found on land near Almería, Spain. The non-nuclear explosives in two of the weapons detonated upon impact with the ground, resulting in the contamination of a 2-square-kilometer (490-acre) (0.78 square mile) area by radioactive plutonium. The fourth, which fell into the Mediterranean Sea, was recovered intact after a 21⁄2-month-long search.[75]
January 21, 1968: the 1968 Thule Air Base B-52 crash involved a United States Air Force (USAF) B-52 bomber. The aircraft was carrying four hydrogen bombs when a cabin fire forced the crew to abandon the aircraft. Six crew members ejected safely, but one who did not have an ejection seat was killed while trying to bail out. The bomber crashed onto sea ice in Greenland, causing the nuclear payload to rupture and disperse, which resulted in widespread radioactive contamination.[76] One of the bombs remains lost.[77]
September 18–19, 1980: the Damascus Accident occurred in Damascus, Arkansas, where a Titan Missile equipped with a nuclear warhead exploded. The accident was caused by a maintenance man who dropped a socket from a socket wrench down an 80-foot (24 m) shaft, puncturing a fuel tank on the rocket. Leaking fuel resulted in a hypergolic fuel explosion, jettisoning the W-53 warhead beyond the launch site.[78][79][80]

Nuclear testing and fallout

Over 500 atmospheric nuclear weapons tests were conducted at various sites around the world from 1945 to 1980. Radioactive fallout from nuclear weapons testing was first drawn to public attention in 1954 when the Castle Bravo hydrogen bomb test at the Pacific Proving Grounds contaminated the crew and catch of the Japanese fishing boat Lucky Dragon.[81] One of the fishermen died in Japan seven months later, and the fear of contaminated tuna led to a temporary boycotting of the popular staple in Japan. The incident caused widespread concern around the world, especially regarding the effects of nuclear fallout and atmospheric nuclear testing, and "provided a decisive impetus for the emergence of the anti-nuclear weapons movement in many countries".[81]

As public awareness and concern mounted over the possible health hazards associated with exposure to the nuclear fallout, various studies were done to assess the extent of the hazard. A Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/ National Cancer Institute study claims that fallout from atmospheric nuclear tests would lead to perhaps 11,000 excess deaths among people alive during atmospheric testing in the United States from all forms of cancer, including leukemia, from 1951 to well into the 21st century.[82][83]
As of March 2009[update], the US is the only nation that compensates nuclear test victims. Since the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act of 1990, more than $1.38 billion in compensation has been approved. The money is going to people who took part in the tests, notably at the Nevada Test Site, and to others exposed to the radiation.[84][85]

In addition, leakage of byproducts of nuclear weapon production into groundwater has been an ongoing issue, particularly at the Hanford site.[86]

Effects of nuclear explosions

Effects of nuclear explosions on human health

Some scientists estimate that a nuclear war with 100 Hiroshima-size nuclear explosions on cities could cost the lives of tens of millions of people from long-term climatic effects alone. The climatology hypothesis is that if each city firestorms, a great deal of soot could be thrown up into the atmosphere which could blanket the earth, cutting out sunlight for years on end, causing the disruption of food chains, in what is termed a nuclear winter.[87][88]

People near the Hiroshima explosion and who managed to survive the explosion subsequently suffered a variety of horrible medical effects. Some of these effects are still present to this day:[89]

Initial stage—the first 1–9 weeks, in which are the greatest number of deaths, with 90% due to thermal injury or blast effects and 10% due to super-lethal radiation exposure.
Intermediate stage—from 10 to 12 weeks. The deaths in this period are from ionizing radiation in the median lethal range – LD50
Late period—lasting from 13 to 20 weeks. This period has some improvement in survivors' condition.
Delayed period—from 20+ weeks. Characterized by numerous complications, mostly related to healing of thermal and mechanical injuries, and if the individual was exposed to a few hundred to a thousand millisieverts of radiation, it is coupled with infertility, sub-fertility and blood disorders. Furthermore, ionizing radiation above a dose of around 50–100 millisievert exposure has been shown to statistically begin increasing one's chance of dying of cancer sometime in their lifetime over the normal unexposed rate of ~25%, in the long term, a heightened rate of cancer, proportional to the dose received, would begin to be observed after ~5+ years, with lesser problems such as eye cataracts and other more minor effects in other organs and tissue also being observed over the long term.

Fallout exposure—depending on if further afield individuals shelter in place or evacuate perpendicular to the direction of the wind, and therefore avoid contact with the fallout plume, and stay there for the days and weeks after the nuclear explosion, their exposure to fallout, and therefore their total dose, will vary. With those who do shelter in place, and or evacuate, experiencing a total dose that would be negligible in comparison to someone who just went about their life as normal.[90][91]

Staying indoors until after the most hazardous fallout isotope, I-131 decays away to 0.1% of its initial quantity after ten half-lifes—which is represented by 80 days in I-131s case, would make the difference between likely contracting Thyroid cancer or escaping completely from this substance depending on the actions of the individual.[92]

Effects of nuclear war

Nuclear war could yield unprecedented human death tolls and habitat destruction. Detonating large numbers of nuclear weapons would have an immediate, short term and long-term effects on the climate, potentially causing cold weather known as a "nuclear winter".[93][94] In 1982, Brian Martin estimated that a US–Soviet nuclear exchange might kill 400–450 million directly, mostly in the United States, Europe and Russia, and maybe several hundred million more through follow-up consequences in those same areas.[95] Many scholars have posited that a global thermonuclear war with Cold War-era stockpiles, or even with the current smaller stockpiles, may lead to the extinction of the human race.[96] The International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War believe that nuclear war could indirectly contribute to human extinction via secondary effects, including environmental consequences, societal breakdown, and economic collapse. It has been estimated that a relatively small-scale nuclear exchange between India and Pakistan involving 100 Hiroshima yield (15 kilotons) weapons, could cause a nuclear winter and kill more than a billion people.[97]

According to a peer-reviewed study published in the journal Nature Food in August 2022, a full-scale nuclear war between the US and Russia would directly kill 360 million people and more than 5 billion people would die from starvation. More than 2 billion people could die from a smaller-scale nuclear war between India and Pakistan.[94][98][99]

Public opposition

Peace movements emerged in Japan and in 1954 they converged to form a unified "Japan Council against Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs." Japanese opposition to nuclear weapons tests in the Pacific Ocean was widespread, and "an estimated 35 million signatures were collected on petitions calling for bans on nuclear weapons".[100]

In the United Kingdom, the Aldermaston Marches organised by the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) took place at Easter 1958, when, according to the CND, several thousand people marched for four days from Trafalgar Square, London, to the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment close to Aldermaston in Berkshire, England, to demonstrate their opposition to nuclear weapons.[101][102] The Aldermaston marches continued into the late 1960s when tens of thousands of people took part in the four-day marches.[100]

In 1959, a letter in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists was the start of a successful campaign to stop the Atomic Energy Commission dumping radioactive waste in the sea 19 kilometres from Boston.[103] In 1962, Linus Pauling won the Nobel Peace Prize for his work to stop the atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons, and the "Ban the Bomb" movement spread.[64]

In 1963, many countries ratified the Partial Test Ban Treaty prohibiting atmospheric nuclear testing. Radioactive fallout became less of an issue and the anti-nuclear weapons movement went into decline for some years.[81][104] A resurgence of interest occurred amid European and American fears of nuclear war in the 1980s.[105]

Costs and technology spin-offs

According to an audit by the Brookings Institution, between 1940 and 1996, the US spent $11.7 trillion in present-day terms[106] on nuclear weapons programs. 57% of which was spent on building nuclear weapons delivery systems. 6.3% of the total$, 732 billion in present-day terms, was spent on environmental remediation and nuclear waste management, for example cleaning up the Hanford site, and 7% of the total$, 820 billion was spent on making nuclear weapons themselves.[107]

Non-weapons uses

Peaceful nuclear explosions are nuclear explosions conducted for non-military purposes, such as activities related to economic development including the creation of canals. During the 1960s and 1970s, both the United States and the Soviet Union conducted a number of PNEs.[108] The United States created plans for several uses of PNEs, including Operation Plowshare.[109] Six of the explosions by the Soviet Union are considered to have been of an applied nature, not just tests.

The United States and the Soviet Union later halted their programs. Definitions and limits are covered in the Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty of 1976.[110][111] The stalled Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty of 1996 would prohibit all nuclear explosions, regardless of whether they are for peaceful purposes or not.[112]

History of development

In the first decades of the 20th century, physics was revolutionized with developments in the understanding of the nature of atoms including the discoveries in atomic theory by John Dalton.[113] Around the turn of the 20th century, it was discovered by Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden and then Ernest Rutherford, that atoms had a highly dense, very small, charged central core called an atomic nucleus. In 1898, Pierre and Marie Curie discovered that pitchblende, an ore of uranium, contained a substance—which they named radium—that emitted large amounts of radiation. Ernest Rutherford and Frederick Soddy identified that atoms were breaking down and turning into different elements. Hopes were raised among scientists and laymen that the elements around us could contain tremendous amounts of unseen energy, waiting to be harnessed.

In Paris in 1934, Irène and Frédéric Joliot-Curie discovered that artificial radioactivity could be induced in stable elements by bombarding them with alpha particles; in Italy Enrico Fermi reported similar results when bombarding uranium with neutrons. He mistakenly believed he had discovered elements 93 and 94, naming them ausenium and hesperium. In 1938 it was realized these were in fact fission products.[citation needed]

In December 1938, Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann reported that they had detected the element barium after bombarding uranium with neutrons. Lise Meitner and Otto Robert Frisch correctly interpreted these results as being due to the splitting of the uranium atom. Frisch confirmed this experimentally on January 13, 1939.[114] They gave the process the name "fission" because of its similarity to the splitting of a cell into two new cells. Even before it was published, news of Meitner's and Frisch's interpretation crossed the Atlantic.[115] In their second publication on nuclear fission in February 1939, Hahn and Strassmann predicted the existence and liberation of additional neutrons during the fission process, opening up the possibility of a nuclear chain reaction.

After learning about the German fission in 1939, Leo Szilard concluded that uranium would be the element which can realize his 1933 idea about nuclear chain reaction.[116]

Uranium appears in nature primarily in two isotopes: uranium-238 and uranium-235. When the nucleus of uranium-235 absorbs a neutron, it undergoes nuclear fission, releasing energy and, on average, 2.5 neutrons. Because uranium-235 releases more neutrons than it absorbs, it can support a chain reaction and so is described as fissile. Uranium-238, on the other hand, is not fissile as it does not normally undergo fission when it absorbs a neutron.

By the start of the war in September 1939, many scientists likely to be persecuted by the Nazis had already escaped. Physicists on both sides were well aware of the possibility of utilizing nuclear fission as a weapon, but no one was quite sure how it could be engineered. In August 1939, concerned that Germany might have its own project to develop fission-based weapons, Albert Einstein signed a letter to U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt warning him of the threat.[117]

Roosevelt responded by setting up the Uranium Committee under Lyman James Briggs but, with little initial funding ($6,000), progress was slow. It was not until the U.S. entered the war in December 1941 that Washington decided to commit the necessary resources to a top-secret high priority bomb project.[118]

Organized research first began in Britain and Canada as part of the Tube Alloys project: the world's first nuclear weapons project. The Maud Committee was set up following the work of Frisch and Rudolf Peierls who calculated uranium-235's critical mass and found it to be much smaller than previously thought which meant that a deliverable bomb should be possible.[119] In the February 1940 Frisch–Peierls memorandum they stated that: "The energy liberated in the explosion of such a super-bomb...will, for an instant, produce a temperature comparable to that of the interior of the sun. The blast from such an explosion would destroy life in a wide area. The size of this area is difficult to estimate, but it will probably cover the centre of a big city."

Edgar Sengier, a director of Shinkolobwe Mine in the Congo which produced by far the highest quality uranium ore in the world, had become aware of uranium's possible use in a bomb. In late 1940, fearing that it might be seized by the Germans, he shipped the mine's entire stockpile of ore to a warehouse in New York.[120]

See also

Cobalt bomb
Cosmic bomb (phrase)
Cuban Missile Crisis
Dirty bomb
International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons
List of global issues
List of nuclear weapons
List of states with nuclear weapons
Nth Country Experiment
Nuclear blackout
Nuclear bunker buster
Nuclear weapons of the United Kingdom
Nuclear weapons in popular culture
Nuclear weapons of the United States
OPANAL (Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean)
Three Non-Nuclear Principles of Japan

References

Notes

^ also known as an atom bomb, atomic bomb, nuclear bomb, or nuclear warhead, and colloquially as an A-bomb or nuke

^ also known colloquially as an H-bomb

^ See also Mordechai Vanunu

^ In the United States, the President and the Secretary of Defense, acting as the National Command Authority, must jointly authorize the use of nuclear weapons.

^ Sublette, Carey (June 12, 2020). "Complete List of All U.S. Nuclear Weapons". Nuclear weapon archive. Retrieved March 18, 2021.

^ "The U S Army Air Forces in World War II". Air Force Historical Support Division. Retrieved November 27, 2023.[dead link]

^ "Frequently Asked Questions #1". Radiation Effects Research Foundation. Archived from the original on September 19, 2007. Retrieved September 18, 2007. total number of deaths is not known precisely ... acute (within two to four months) deaths ... Hiroshima ... 90,000–166,000 ... Nagasaki ... 60,000–80,000

^ "Federation of American Scientists: Status of World Nuclear Forces". Fas.org. Archived from the original on January 2, 2013. Retrieved December 29, 2012.

^ "Nuclear Weapons – Israel". Fas.org. January 8, 2007. Archived from the original on December 7, 2010. Retrieved December 15, 2010.

^ Executive release. "South African nuclear bomb". Nuclear Threat Initiatives. Nuclear Threat Initiatives, South Africa (NTI South Africa). Archived from the original on September 28, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2012.

^ Ian Lowe, "Three minutes to midnight", Australasian Science, March 2016, p. 49.

^ Jungk 1958, p. 201.

^ Educational Foundation for Nuclear Science, Inc. (February 1954). "Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists: Science and Public Affairs. Educational Foundation for Nuclear Science, Inc.: 61–. ISSN 0096-3402. Archived from the original on March 31, 2017.

^ a b c d e f Hansen, Chuck. U.S. Nuclear Weapons: The Secret History. San Antonio, TX: Aerofax, 1988; and the more-updated Hansen, Chuck, "Swords of Armageddon: U.S. Nuclear Weapons Development since 1945 Archived December 30, 2016, at the Wayback Machine" (CD-ROM & download available). PDF. 2,600 pages, Sunnyvale, California, Chuklea Publications, 1995, 2007. ISBN 978-0-9791915-0-3 (2nd Ed.)

^ Albright, David; Kramer, Kimberly (August 22, 2005). "Neptunium 237 and Americium: World Inventories and Proliferation Concerns" (PDF). Institute for Science and International Security. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 3, 2012. Retrieved October 13, 2011.

^ Carey Sublette, Nuclear Weapons Frequently Asked Questions: 4.5.2 "Dirty" and "Clean" Weapons Archived March 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, accessed May 10, 2011.

^ On India's alleged hydrogen bomb test, see Carey Sublette, What Are the Real Yields of India's Test? Archived September 27, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.

^ McKirdy, Euan (January 6, 2016). "North Korea announces it conducted nuclear test". CNN. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Retrieved January 7, 2016.

^ "Nuclear Testing and Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) Timeline". Arms control association. Archived from the original on April 21, 2020.

^ Sublette, Carey. "The Nuclear Weapon Archive". Archived from the original on March 1, 2007. Retrieved March 7, 2007.

^ Simha, Rakesh Krishnan (January 5, 2016). "Nuclear overkill: The quest for the 10 gigaton bomb". Russia Beyond. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved October 8, 2023.

^ Wellerstein, Alex (October 29, 2021). "The untold story of the world's biggest nuclear bomb". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Archived from the original on August 27, 2023. Retrieved October 8, 2023.

^ "Why the U.S. once set off a nuclear bomb in space". Premium. July 15, 2021. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved November 27, 2023.

^ U.S. Department of Energy, Restricted Data Declassification Decisions, 1946 to the Present (RDD-8) Archived September 24, 2015, at the Wayback Machine (January 1, 2002), accessed November 20, 2011.

^ a b Gsponer, Andre (2005). "Fourth Generation Nuclear Weapons: Military effectiveness and collateral effects". arXiv:physics/0510071.

^ "Details on antimatter triggered fusion bombs". NextBigFuture.com. September 22, 2015. Archived from the original on April 22, 2017.

^ "Page discussing the possibility of using antimatter as a trigger for a thermonuclear explosion". Cui.unige.ch. Archived from the original on April 24, 2013. Retrieved May 30, 2013.

^ Gsponer, Andre; Hurni, Jean-Pierre (1987). "The physics of antimatter induced fusion and thermonuclear explosions". In Velarde, G.; Minguez, E. (eds.). Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Emerging Nuclear Energy Systems, Madrid, June 30/July 4, 1986. World Scientific, Singapore. pp. 166–169. arXiv:physics/0507114.

^ Keay Davidson; Chronicle Science Writer (October 4, 2004). "Air Force pursuing antimatter weapons: Program was touted publicly, then came official gag order". Sfgate.com. Archived from the original on June 9, 2012. Retrieved May 30, 2013.

^ "Fourth Generation Nuclear Weapons". Archived from the original on March 23, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2014.

^ Stephen I. Schwartz, ed., Atomic Audit: The Costs and Consequences of U.S. Nuclear Weapons Since 1940. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 1998. See also Estimated Minimum Incurred Costs of U.S. Nuclear Weapons Programs, 1940–1996, an excerpt from the book. Archived November 21, 2008, at the Wayback Machine

^ Mehta, Aaron (October 27, 2023). "US to introduce new nuclear gravity bomb design: B61-13". Breaking Defense. Archived from the original on December 17, 2023. Retrieved November 27, 2023.

^ Michael I. Handel (November 12, 2012). War, Strategy and Intelligence. Routledge. pp. 85–. ISBN 978-1-136-28624-7. Archived from the original on March 31, 2017.

^ Creveld, Martin Van (2000). "Technology and War II:Postmodern War?". In Charles Townshend (ed.). The Oxford History of Modern War. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 349. ISBN 978-0-19-285373-8.

^ Mearsheimer, John (2006). "Conversations in International Relations: Interview with John J. Mearsheimer (Part I)" (PDF). International Relations. 20 (1): 105–123. doi:10.1177/0047117806060939. ISSN 0047-1178. S2CID 220788933. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 1, 2013. Retrieved November 23, 2020. See page 116

^ Kenneth Waltz, "More May Be Better", in Scott Sagan and Kenneth Waltz, eds., The Spread of Nuclear Weapons (New York: Norton, 1995).

^ a b Kenneth Waltz, "The Spread of Nuclear Weapons: More May Better", Archived December 1, 2010, at the Wayback Machine Adelphi Papers, no. 171 (London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1981).

^ "Should We Let the Bomb Spread? Edited by Mr. Henry D. Sokolski. Strategic studies institute. November 2016". Archived from the original on November 23, 2016.

^ See, for example: Feldman, Noah. "Islam, Terror and the Second Nuclear Age Archived February 19, 2016, at the Wayback Machine", New York Times Magazine (October 29, 2006).

^ Daniel Plesch & Stephen Young, "Senseless policy", Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists Archived September 19, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, November/December 1998, page 4. Fetched from URL on April 18, 2011.

^ Gallucci, Robert (September 2006). "Averting Nuclear Catastrophe: Contemplating Extreme Responses to U.S. Vulnerability". Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science. 607: 51–58. doi:10.1177/0002716206290457. S2CID 68857650.

^ a b Allison, Graham (March 13, 2009). "How to Keep the Bomb From Terrorist s". Newsweek. Archived from the original on May 13, 2013. Retrieved January 28, 2013.

^ "The Pentagon Revealed Its Nuclear War Strategy and It's Terrifying". Vice. June 21, 2019. Archived from the original on December 7, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019.

^ "Nuclear weapons: experts alarmed by new Pentagon 'war-fighting' doctrine". The Guardian. June 19, 2019. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019.

^ Eric Schlosser, Today's nuclear dilemma Archived January 1, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, November/December 2015, vol. 71 no. 6, 11–17.

^ a b Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (2010). "Status of Signature and Ratification Archived April 6, 2011, at the Wayback Machine". Accessed May 27, 2010. Of the "Annex 2" states whose ratification of the CTBT is required before it enters into force, China, Egypt, Iran, Israel, and the United States have signed but not ratified the Treaty. India, North Korea, and Pakistan have not signed the Treaty.

^ Richelson, Jeffrey. Spying on the bomb: American nuclear intelligence from Nazi Germany to Iran and North Korea. New York: Norton, 2006.

^ The Presidential Nuclear Initiatives (PNIs) on Tactical Nuclear Weapons At a Glance Archived January 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, Fact Sheet, Arms Control Association.

^ Nuclear weapons and international humanitarian law Archived April 21, 2010, at the Wayback Machine International Committee of the Red Cross

^ Mark Diesendorf (2013). "Book review: Contesting the future of nuclear power" (PDF). Energy Policy. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 27, 2013. Retrieved July 9, 2013.[dubious – discuss]

^ "History of the TPNW". ICAN. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2023.

^ Koran, Laura (January 25, 2018). "'Doomsday clock' ticks closer to apocalyptic midnight". CNN. Archived from the original on November 3, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019.

^ Spinazze, Gayle (January 24, 2023). "PRESS RELEASE: Doomsday Clock set at 90 seconds to midnight". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Archived from the original on January 24, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2023.

^ "America prepares for a new nuclear-arms race". The Economist. August 12, 2024. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved August 13, 2024.

^ Gusterson, Hugh, "Finding Article VI Archived September 17, 2008, at the Wayback Machine" Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists (January 8, 2007).

^ Jim Hoagland (October 6, 2011). "Nuclear energy after Fukushima". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 1, 2013. Retrieved September 6, 2017.

^ Lawrence M. Krauss. The Doomsday Clock Still Ticks, Scientific American, January 2010, p. 26.

^ Taubman, William (2017). Gorbachev: His Life and Times. New York City: Simon and Schuster. p. 291. ISBN 978-1-4711-4796-8.

^ Graham, Nick (April 5, 2009). "Obama Prague Speech On Nuclear Weapons". Huffingtonpost.com. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved May 30, 2013.

^ "CNN Poll: Public divided on eliminating all nuclear weapons". Politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com. April 12, 2010. Archived from the original on July 21, 2013. Retrieved May 30, 2013.

^ Krepon, Michael. "The Stability-Instability Paradox, Misperception, and Escalation Control in South Asia" (PDF). Stimson. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2015. Retrieved November 20, 2015.

^ "Michael Krepon • The Stability-Instability Paradox". Archived from the original on January 12, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2014.

^ Ben Goddard (January 27, 2010). "Cold Warriors say no nukes". The Hill. Archived from the original on February 13, 2014.

^ Hugh Gusterson (March 30, 2012). "The new abolitionists". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Archived from the original on February 17, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2014.

^ Reichmann, Kelsey (June 16, 2019). "Here's how many nuclear warheads exist, and which countries own them". Defense News. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved July 23, 2019.

^ "Global Nuclear Arsenal Declines, But Future Cuts Uncertain Amid U.S.-Russia Tensions". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL). June 17, 2019. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved July 23, 2019.

^ Kofi Annan (July 14, 1997). "Renewing the United Nations: A Program for Reform". United Nations. A/51/950. Archived from the original on March 18, 2017. Retrieved March 17, 2017.

^ a b Jerry Brown and Rinaldo Brutoco (1997). Profiles in Power: The Anti-nuclear Movement and the Dawn of the Solar Age, Twayne Publishers, pp. 191–192.

^ "Atomic Accidents – Nuclear Museum". ahf.nuclearmuseum.org/. Archived from the original on October 12, 2023. Retrieved November 28, 2023.

^ "The Nuclear 'Demon Core' That Killed Two Scientists". April 23, 2018. Archived from the original on April 24, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018.

^ "The Cold War's Missing Atom Bombs". Der Spiegel. November 14, 2008. Archived from the original on June 27, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2019.

^ "Accident Revealed After 29 Years: H-Bomb Fell Near Albuquerque in 1957". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. August 27, 1986. Archived from the original on September 10, 2014. Retrieved August 31, 2014.

^ Barry Schneider (May 1975). "Big Bangs from Little Bombs". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. p. 28. Retrieved July 13, 2009.

^ "Ticonderoga Cruise Reports". Archived from the original (Navy.mil weblist of Aug 2003 compilation from cruise reports) on September 7, 2004. Retrieved April 20, 2012. The National Archives hold[s] deck logs for aircraft carriers for the Vietnam Conflict.

^ Broken Arrows Archived September 1, 2013, at the Wayback Machine at www.atomicarchive.com. Accessed August 24, 2007.

^ "U.S. Confirms '65 Loss of H-Bomb Near Japanese Islands". The Washington Post. Reuters. May 9, 1989. p. A–27.

^ Hayes, Ron (January 17, 2007). "H-bomb incident crippled pilot's career". Palm Beach Post. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011. Retrieved May 24, 2006.

^ Maydew, Randall C. (1997). America's Lost H-Bomb: Palomares, Spain, 1966. Sunflower University Press. ISBN 978-0-89745-214-4.

^ Long, Tony (January 17, 2008). "Jan. 17, 1966: H-Bombs Rain Down on a Spanish Fishing Village". WIRED. Archived from the original on December 3, 2008. Retrieved February 16, 2008.

^ "The Cold War's Missing Atom Bombs". Der Spiegel. November 14, 2008. Archived from the original on June 27, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2019.

^ "US left nuclear weapon under ice in Greenland". The Daily Telegraph. November 11, 2008. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022.

^ Schlosser, Eric (2013). "Command and Control: Nuclear Weapons, the Damascus Accident, and the Illusion of Safety". Physics Today. Vol. 67. pp. 48–50. Bibcode:2014PhT....67d..48W. doi:10.1063/PT.3.2350. ISBN 978-1-59420-227-8.

^ Christ, Mark K. "Titan II Missile Explosion". The Encyclopedia of Arkansas History & Culture. Arkansas Historic Preservation Program. Archived from the original on September 12, 2014. Retrieved August 31, 2014.

^ Stumpf, David K. (2000). Christ, Mark K.; Slater, Cathryn H. (eds.). "We Can Neither Confirm Nor Deny" Sentinels of History: Refelections on Arkansas Properties on the National Register of Historic Places. Fayetteville, Arkansas: University of Arkansas Press.

^ a b c Rudig, Wolfgang (1990). Anti-nuclear Movements: A World Survey of Opposition to Nuclear Energy. Longman. pp. 54–55. ISBN 978-0582902695.

^ "Report on the Health Consequences to the American Population from Nuclear Weapons Tests Conducted by the United States and Other Nations". CDC. Archived from the original on December 4, 2013. Retrieved December 7, 2013.

^ Committee to Review the CDC-NCI Feasibility Study of the Health Consequences Nuclear Weapons Tests, National Research Council (2003). Exposure of the American Population to Radioactive Fallout from Nuclear Weapons Tests. doi:10.17226/10621. ISBN 978-0-309-08713-1. PMID 25057651. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014.

^ "What governments offer to victims of nuclear tests". ABC News. Archived from the original on January 18, 2023. Retrieved October 24, 2014.

^ "Radiation Exposure Compensation System: Claims to Date Summary of Claims Received by 06/11/2009" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on September 7, 2009.

^ Coghlan, Andy. "US nuclear dump is leaking toxic waste". New Scientist. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved March 12, 2016.

^ Philip Yam. Nuclear Exchange, Scientific American, June 2010, p. 24.

^ Alan Robock and Owen Brian Toon. Local Nuclear War, Global Suffering, Scientific American, January 2010, pp. 74–81.

^ "Hiroshima and Nagasaki: The Long Term Health Effects | K=1 Project". k1project.columbia.edu. Archived from the original on June 20, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017.

^ "Decay Information". Fallout Radiation.com. Archived from the original on August 31, 2011. 7 hour rule: At 7 hours after detonation the fission product activity will have decreased to about 1/10 (10%) of its amount at 1 hour. At about 2 days (49 hours-7X7) the activity will have decreased to 1% of the 1-hour value

^ "Nuclear Warfare" (PDF). p. 22. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 26, 2013. Retrieved May 21, 2016.

^ "Public Health Assessment – Iodine-131 Releases" (PDF). Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. U.S. Center for Disease Control. March 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 11, 2016. Retrieved May 21, 2016.

^ Meyer, Robinson (April 29, 2016). "You're More Likely to Die in a Human Extinction Event Than a Car Crash". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on May 1, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2020.

^ a b Diaz-Maurin, François (October 20, 2022). "Nowhere to hide: How a nuclear war would kill you — and almost everyone else". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2022.

^ Martin, Brian (1982). "Critique of nuclear extinction". Journal of Peace Research. 19 (4): 287–300. doi:10.1177/002234338201900401. S2CID 110974484. Archived from the original on April 4, 2020. Retrieved October 25, 2014.

^ Tonn, Bruce & MacGregor, Donald (2009). "A singular chain of events". Futures. 41 (10): 706–714. doi:10.1016/j.futures.2009.07.009. S2CID 144553194.

^ Helfand, Ira. "Nuclear Famine: Two Billion People at Risk?" (PDF). International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 5, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2016.

^ "World Nuclear war between the U.S. and Russia would kill more than 5 billion people – just from starvation, study finds". CBS News. August 16, 2022. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2022.

^ Xia, Lili; Robock, Alan; Scherrer, Kim; Harrison, Cheryl S.; Bodirsky, Benjamin Leon; Weindl, Isabelle; Jägermeyr, Jonas; Bardeen, Charles G.; Toon, Owen B.; Heneghan, Ryan (August 15, 2022). "Global food insecurity and famine from reduced crop, marine fishery and livestock production due to climate disruption from nuclear war soot injection". Nature Food. 3 (8): 586–596. Bibcode:2022NatFd...3..586X. doi:10.1038/s43016-022-00573-0. hdl:11250/3039288. PMID 37118594. S2CID 251601831.

^ a b Jim Falk (1982). Global Fission: The Battle Over Nuclear Power, Oxford University Press, pp. 96–97.

^ "A brief history of CND". Cnduk.org. Archived from the original on June 17, 2004. Retrieved May 30, 2013.

^ "Early defections in march to Aldermaston". Guardian Unlimited. London. April 5, 1958. Archived from the original on October 8, 2006.

^ Jim Falk (1982). Global Fission: The Battle Over Nuclear Power, Oxford University Press, p. 93.

^ Jim Falk (1982). Global Fission: The Battle Over Nuclear Power, Oxford University Press, p. 98.

^ Spencer Weart, Nuclear Fear: A History of Images (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1988), chapters 16 and 19.

^ 1634–1699: McCusker, J. J. (1997). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States: Addenda et Corrigenda (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1700–1799: McCusker, J. J. (1992). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1800–present: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. "Consumer Price Index (estimate) 1800–". Retrieved February 29, 2024.

^ "Estimated Minimum Incurred Costs of U.S. Nuclear Weapons Programs, 1940–1996". Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on March 5, 2004. Retrieved November 20, 2015.

^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on May 14, 2024. Retrieved May 14, 2024.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on April 3, 2024. Retrieved May 14, 2024.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "Announcement of Treaty on Underground Nuclear Explosions Peaceful Purposes (PNE Treaty)" (PDF). Gerald R. Ford Museum and Library. May 28, 1976. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 5, 2016. Retrieved February 22, 2016.

^ Peters, Gerhard; Woolley, John T. "Gerald R. Ford: "Message to the Senate Transmitting United States-Soviet Treaty and Protocol on the Limitation of Underground Nuclear Explosions", July 29, 1976". The American Presidency Project. University of California – Santa Barbara. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved February 22, 2016.

^ "Status of Signature and Ratification". ctbto dot org. CTBT Organization Preparatory Commission. Archived from the original on December 28, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2016.

^ Young-Brown, F. (2016). Nuclear Fusion and Fission. Great Discoveries in Science. Cavendish Square Publishing, LLC. p. 33. ISBN 978-1-502-61949-5.

^ Rhodes 1986, pp. 263, 268.

^ Rhodes 1986, p. 268.

^ "Leo Szilard | Biographies". www.atomicarchive.com.

^ Rhodes 1986, pp. 305–312.

^ Herrera, Geoffrey Lucas (2006). Technology and International Transformation: The Railroad, the Atom Bomb, and the Politics of Technological Change. SUNY Press. pp. 179–80. ISBN 978-0-7914-6868-5.

^ Laucht, Christoph (2012). Elemental Germans: Klaus Fuchs, Rudolf Peierls and the Making of British Nuclear Culture 1939–59. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 31–33. ISBN 978-1-137-22295-4.

^ Groves, Leslie R. (1983). Now It Can Be Told: The Story of the Manhattan Project. Da Capo Press. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-786-74822-8.

Bibliography

Bethe, Hans Albrecht. The Road from Los Alamos. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1991. ISBN 0-671-74012-1
DeVolpi, Alexander, Minkov, Vladimir E., Simonenko, Vadim A., and Stanford, George S. Nuclear Shadowboxing: Contemporary Threats from Cold War Weaponry. Fidlar Doubleday, 2004 (Two volumes, both accessible on Google Book Search) (Content of both volumes is now available in the 2009 trilogy by Alexander DeVolpi: Nuclear Insights: The Cold War Legacy)
Glasstone, Samuel and Dolan, Philip J. The Effects of Nuclear Weapons (third edition). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1977. Available online (PDF).
NATO Handbook on the Medical Aspects of NBC Defensive Operations (Part I – Nuclear). Archived April 8, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force: Washington, D.C., 1996
Hansen, Chuck. U.S. Nuclear Weapons: The Secret History. Arlington, TX: Aerofax, 1988
Hansen, Chuck, "Swords of Armageddon: U.S. nuclear weapons development since 1945" (CD-ROM & download available). Archived December 30, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. PDF. 2,600 pages, Sunnyvale, California, Chucklea Publications, 1995, 2007. ISBN 978-0-9791915-0-3 (2nd Ed.)
Holloway, David. Stalin and the Bomb. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1994. ISBN 0-300-06056-4
Jungk, Robert (1958). Brighter than a Thousand Suns: A Personal History of the Atomic Scientists. New York: Harcourt Brace. ISBN 0-15-614150-7. OCLC 181321. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)

The Manhattan Engineer District, "The Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" (1946), Archived February 4, 2012, at the Wayback Machine

(in French) Jean-Hugues Oppel, Réveillez le président, Éditions Payot et rivages, 2007 (ISBN 978-2-7436-1630-4). The book is a fiction about the nuclear weapons of France; the book also contains about ten chapters on true historical incidents involving nuclear weapons and strategy.
The Effects of Nuclear War. Office of Technology Assessment, May 1979.
Rhodes, Richard. Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995. ISBN 0-684-82414-0
Rhodes, Richard (1986). The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-671-44133-7. OCLC 13793436.
Shultz, George P. and Goodby, James E. The War that Must Never be Fought, Hoover Press, 2015, ISBN 978-0-8179-1845-3.
Smyth, Henry DeWolf. Atomic Energy for Military Purposes. Archived April 21, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1945. (Smyth Report – the first declassified report by the US government on nuclear weapons)
Weart, Spencer R. Nuclear Fear: A History of Images. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1988. ISBN 0-674-62836-5
Weart, Spencer R. The Rise of Nuclear Fear. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2012. ISBN 0-674-05233-1

Further reading

Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries

Laura Grego and David Wright, "Broken Shield: Missiles designed to destroy incoming nuclear warheads fail frequently in tests and could increase global risk of mass destruction", Scientific American, vol. 320, no. no. 6 (June 2019), pp. 62–67. "Current U.S. missile defense plans are being driven largely by technology, politics and fear. Missile defenses will not allow us to escape our vulnerability to nuclear weapons. Instead large-scale developments will create barriers to taking real steps toward reducing nuclear risks—by blocking further cuts in nuclear arsenals and potentially spurring new deployments." (p. 67.)
Michael T. Klare, "Missile Mania: The death of the INF [Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces] Treaty [of 1987] has escalated the arms race", The Nation, vol. 309, no. 6 (September 23, 2019), p. 4.
Moniz, Ernest J., and Sam Nunn, "The Return of Doomsday: The New Nuclear Arms Race – and How Washington and Moscow Can Stop It", Foreign Affairs, vol. 98, no. 5 (September / October 2019), pp. 150–161. Former U.S. Secretary of Energy Ernest Moniz and former U.S. Senator Sam Nunn write that "the old [strategic] equilibrium" between the United States and Russia has been "destabilized" by "clashing national interests, insufficient dialogue, eroding arms control structures, advanced missile systems, and new cyberweapons... Unless Washington and Moscow confront these problems now, a major international conflict or nuclear escalation is disturbingly plausible—perhaps even likely." (p. 161.)
Thomas Powers, "The Nuclear Worrier" (review of Daniel Ellsberg, The Doomsday Machine: Confessions of a Nuclear War Planner, New York, Bloomsbury, 2017, ISBN 9781608196708, 420 pp.), The New York Review of Books, vol. LXV, no. 1 (January 18, 2018), pp. 13–15.
Eric Schlosser, Command and Control: Nuclear Weapons, the Damascus Accident, and the Illusion of Safety, Penguin Press, 2013, ISBN 1594202273. The book became the basis for a 2-hour 2017 PBS American Experience episode, likewise titled "Command and Control". Nuclear weapons continue to be equally hazardous to their owners as to their potential targets. Under the 1970 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, nuclear-weapon states are obliged to work toward the elimination of nuclear weapons.
Tom Stevenson, "A Tiny Sun" (review of Fred Kaplan, The Bomb: Presidents, Generals, and the Secret History of Nuclear War, Simon and Schuster, 2021,  384 pp.; and Keir A. Lieber and Daryl G. Press, The Myth of the Nuclear Revolution: Power Politics in the Atomic Age, Cornell, 2020, 180 pp.), London Review of Books, vol. 44, no. 4 (24 February 2022), pp. 29–32. "Nuclear strategists systematically underestimate the chances of nuclear accident... [T]here have been too many close calls for accidental use to be discounted." (p. 32.)
David Wright and Cameron Tracy, "Over-hyped: Physics dictates that hypersonic weapons cannot live up to the grand promises made on their behalf", Scientific American, vol. 325, no. 2 (August 2021), pp. 64–71. "Failure to fully assess [the potential benefits and costs of hypersonic weapons] is a recipe for wasteful spending and increased global risk." (p. 71.)

External links

Media related to Nuclear weapons at Wikimedia Commons
Nuclear Weapon Archive from Carey Sublette: reliable source, has links to other sources and an informative FAQ.
The Federation of American Scientists Archived October 18, 1996, at the Wayback Machine provide information on weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons and their effects
Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues Archived March 2, 2001, at the Wayback Machine – contains resources related to nuclear weapons, including a historical and technical overview and searchable bibliography of web and print resources
Video archive of US, Soviet, UK, Chinese and French Nuclear Weapon Testing at sonicbomb.com
The National Museum of Nuclear Science & History (United States) Archived March 27, 2021, at the Wayback Machine – located in New Mexico; a Smithsonian Affiliate Museum
Nuclear Emergency and Radiation Resources Archived May 15, 2021, at the Wayback Machine
The Manhattan Project: Making the Atomic Bomb at AtomicArchive.com
Los Alamos National Laboratory: History Archived January 15, 2009, at the Wayback Machine (US nuclear history)
Race for the Superbomb Archived November 10, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, PBS website on the history of the H-bomb
Recordings of recollections of the victims of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
The Woodrow Wilson Center's Nuclear Proliferation International History Project or NPIHP is a global network of individuals and institutions engaged in the study of international nuclear history through archival documents, oral history interviews and other empirical sources.
NUKEMAP3D Archived August 28, 2015, at the Wayback Machine – a 3D nuclear weapons effects simulator powered by Google Maps.

vte

Little Boy (Mark 1)
Thin Man (Mark 2)
Fat Man (Mark 3)
Mark 4
Mark 5
Mark 6
Mark 7
Mark 8
Mark 10
Mark 11
Mark 12
Mark 13
Mark 18
Mark 20
Mk 105
B57

W4
W5
W7
W8
W12
W13
W25
W30
W31
W34
W37
W40
W42
W44
W45
XW-51
W54
W72
W76-2
W81

Mark 90
Mk 101
Mk 105
B57

W9
W19
W23
W33
W48
W54
W74
W75
W79-1
W82-1

XM1 ADM
T2 ADM
T4
Medium Atomic Demolition Munition (MADM)
Special Atomic Demolition Munition (SADM)
Tactical Atomic Demolition Munition (TADM)

Mark 14
Mark 15
TX16
Mark 17
Mark 21
TX22
Mark 24
Mark 26
Mark 27
B28
Mark 36
Mark 39
B41
B43
TX46
B53
B61
B77
B83
B90

B90

W15
W27
W28
TX29
XW-35
W38
W39
W41
XW-46
W47
W49
W50
W52
W53
W55
W56
W58
W59
W60
W61
W62
W63
W64
W67
W68
W69
W70
W71
W73
W76
W78
W80
W84
W85
W86
W87
W88
W89
W91
Reliable Replacement Warhead (RRW)
W93

W63
W64
W65
W66
W70-3

W79-0
W82-0

Robin
Swan
Python
Tsetse
Kinglet
Starling
Komodo

Gadget
Sausage
RACER IV

vte

missile M1
missile M2
missile M20
missile S1 
missile S2
missile S3
missile M4
missile M45
missile M5
missile M51

Pluton
Hadès
ASMP
ASMP-A​
ASN4G

AN-11 bomb
AN-22 bomb
AN-52 bomb
MR 31
MR 41
MR 50 CTC
AN 51 CTC
AN 52 CTC
TN 60
TN 61
TN 70
TN 71
TN 75
TN 76
TN 80
TN 81
TN 90
TNA
TNO

French nuclear deterrence
FAS
FOST
France and weapons of mass destruction

vte

Vickers Valiant
Avro Vulcan
Handley Page Victor

Blue Steel
Skybolt (cancelled)

Blue Danube
Red Beard
Yellow Sun
WE.177

Mk.1 atom bomb
Violet Club
Orange Herald
Green Bamboo
Green Grass
Red Snow
WE.177

Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile Test Centre, RAF Spadeadam

Ulysses

Resolution-class submarine

Polaris A3T and A3TK

ET.317
Chevaline upgrade

Vanguard-class submarine (1994–present)
Dreadnought-class submarine (replacement)

Trident II D5

Holbrook
Astraea (planned)

Blue Water missile
Blue Peacock nuclear landmine

vte

Outline

Chemistry
Engineering
Physics
Atomic nucleus
Fission
Fusion
Radiation
ionizing
braking

ionizing
braking

Tritium
Deuterium
Helium-3
Fertile material
Fissile material
Isotope separation
Nuclear material
Uranium
enriched
depleted
Plutonium
Thorium

Uranium
enriched
depleted
Plutonium
Thorium

enriched
depleted

Activation
Capture
Poison
Cross section
Generator
Radiation
Wigner effect
Reflector
Temperature
Thermal
Fast
Fusion

Wigner effect

by country
Power plant
Economics
Accidents and incidents
Policy
Fusion
Radioisotope thermoelectric (RTG)
MMRTG
Propulsion
rocket
Safety and security
Nuclear meltdown

MMRTG

rocket

Nuclear meltdown

Autoradiograph
RadBall
Scintigraphy
Single-photon emission (SPECT)
Positron-emission tomography (PET)

Fast-neutron
Neutron capture therapy of cancer
Targeted alpha-particle
Proton-beam
Tomotherapy
Brachytherapy
Radiosurgery
Radiopharmacology

Atomic gardening
Electron-beam processing
Food irradiation
Gemstone irradiation

Arms race
Delivery
Design
Disarmament
Ethics
Explosion
effects
History
Proliferation
Testing
high-altitude
underground
Warfare
Yield
TNTe

effects

high-altitude
underground

TNTe

States with nuclear weapons
Historical stockpiles and tests
Tests
Tests in the United States
WMD treaties
Weapon-free zones
Weapons

Tests
Tests in the United States

Actinide
Reprocessed uranium
Reactor-grade plutonium
Minor actinide
Activation
Fission
LLFP
Actinide chemistry

Reprocessed uranium
Reactor-grade plutonium
Minor actinide

LLFP

Fuel cycle
High-level (HLW)
Low-level (LLW)
Nuclear decommissioning
Repository
Reprocessing
Spent fuel
pool
cask
Transmutation

pool
cask

Nuclear power
Nuclear weapons
Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future
Anti-nuclear movement
Uranium mining
Nuclear power phase-out

Aqueous homogeneous
Boiling
BWR
ABWR
ESBWR
Kerena
Natural fission
Pressurized
AP1000
APR-1400
APR+
APWR
ATMEA1
CAP1400
CPR-1000
EPR
HPR-1000
ACPR1000
ACP1000
VVER
RITM-200
KLT-40
OK-150/OK-900
OK-650
KN-3
VM
IPWR-900
many others
Supercritical (SCWR)

BWR
ABWR
ESBWR
Kerena

AP1000
APR-1400
APR+
APWR
ATMEA1
CAP1400
CPR-1000
EPR
HPR-1000
ACPR1000
ACP1000
VVER
RITM-200
KLT-40
OK-150/OK-900
OK-650
KN-3
VM
IPWR-900
many others

ACPR1000
ACP1000

KLT-40
OK-150/OK-900
OK-650

Pressurized
CANDU
CANDU 6
CANDU 9
EC6
AFCR
ACR-1000
CVTR
IPHWR
IPHWR-220
IPHWR-540
IPHWR-700
PHWR KWU
MZFR
R3
R4 Marviken

CANDU
CANDU 6
CANDU 9
EC6
AFCR
ACR-1000
CVTR
IPHWR
IPHWR-220
IPHWR-540
IPHWR-700
PHWR KWU
MZFR
R3
R4 Marviken

CANDU 6
CANDU 9
EC6
AFCR
ACR-1000

IPHWR-220
IPHWR-540
IPHWR-700

HWLWR
ATR
HW BLWR 250
Steam-generating (SGHWR)
AHWR

ATR
HW BLWR 250

WR-1

HWGCR
EL-4
KKN
KS 150
Lucens

EL-4
KKN
KS 150
Lucens

AM-1
AMB-X
EGP-6
RBMK
MKER

Uranium Naturel Graphite Gaz (UNGG)
Magnox
Advanced gas-cooled (AGR)

GTMHR
MHR-T
UHTREX
VHTR (HTGR)
PBR (PBMR)
AVR
HTR-10
HTR-PM
THTR-300
PMR

MHR-T

PBR (PBMR)
AVR
HTR-10
HTR-PM
THTR-300
PMR

AVR
HTR-10
HTR-PM
THTR-300

Fuji MSR
Liquid-fluoride thorium reactor (LFTR)
Molten-Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE)
Integral Molten Salt Reactor (IMSR)
TMSR-500
TMSR-LF1

Breeder (FBR)
Integral (IFR)
Liquid-metal-cooled (LMFR)
OK-550
BM-40A
VT-1
Small sealed transportable autonomous (SSTAR)
Traveling-wave (TWR)
Energy Multiplier Module (EM2)
Reduced-moderation (RMWR)
Fast Breeder Test Reactor (FBTR)
Dual fluid reactor (DFR)

OK-550
BM-40A
VT-1

Sodium (SFR)
BN-350
BN-600
BN-800
BN-1200
CFR-600
Phénix
Superphénix
PFBR
FBR-600
CEFR
PFR
PRISM
Lead
BREST-300
Helium gas (GFR)
Stable Salt Reactor (SSR)

BN-350
BN-600
BN-800
BN-1200
CFR-600
Phénix
Superphénix
PFBR
FBR-600
CEFR
PFR
PRISM

BREST-300

Organic nuclear reactor
OMRE
Arbus
Piqua
Aircraft Reactor Experiment

OMRE
Arbus
Piqua

Field-reversed configuration
Levitated dipole
Reversed field pinch
Spheromak
Stellarator
Tokamak

Bubble (acoustic)
Fusor
electrostatic
Laser-driven
Magnetized-target
Z-pinch

electrostatic

Dense plasma focus
Migma
Muon-catalyzed
Polywell
Pyroelectric

Nuclear technology portal
 Category
 Commons

vte

Crimes involving radioactive substances
Criticality accidents and incidents
Nuclear meltdown accidents
Military nuclear accidents
Nuclear and radiation accidents and incidents
Nuclear and radiation accidents by death toll
Nuclear and radiation fatalities by country
Nuclear weapons tests
China
France
India
North Korea
Pakistan
South Africa
Soviet Union
United Kingdom
in Australia
in the United States
United States
Sunken nuclear submarines
List of orphan source incidents
Nuclear power accidents by country

China
France
India
North Korea
Pakistan
South Africa
Soviet Union
United Kingdom
in Australia
in the United States
United States

in Australia
in the United States

2019 Nyonoksa radiation accident
2011 Fukushima nuclear accident
2001 Instituto Oncológico Nacional#Accident
1996 San Juan de Dios radiotherapy accident
1990 Clinic of Zaragoza radiotherapy accident
1987 Goiânia accident
1986 Chernobyl disaster
Effects
Related articles
1985 Chazhma Bay nuclear accident
1985–1987 Therac-25 accident
1982 Andreev Bay nuclear accident
1980 Kramatorsk radiological accident
1979 Three Mile Island accident and Three Mile Island accident health effects
1969 Lucens reactor
1962  Thor missile launch failures at Johnston Atoll under Operation Fishbowl
1962 Cuban Missile Crisis
1961 K-19 nuclear accident
1961 SL-1 nuclear meltdown
1957 Kyshtym disaster
1957 Windscale fire
1957 Operation Plumbbob
1954 Totskoye nuclear exercise
Bikini Atoll
Hanford Site
Rocky Flats Plant
1945 Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki

Effects
Related articles

International Nuclear Event Scale (INES)
Vulnerability of nuclear plants to attack
Books about nuclear issues
Films about nuclear issues
Anti-war movement
Bikini Atoll
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists
History of the anti-nuclear movement
International Day against Nuclear Tests
Nuclear close calls
Nuclear-Free Future Award
Nuclear-free zone
Nuclear power debate
Nuclear power phase-out
Nuclear weapons debate
Peace activists
Peace movement
Peace camp
Russell–Einstein Manifesto
Smiling Sun

Nuclear technology

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataJapanCzech RepublicSpainIsrael

Historical Dictionary of SwitzerlandNARA

Venus
Earth
Mars
Europa
Enceladus
Titan

Habitable zone
Potentially habitable exoplanets
Galactic habitable zone

Binary star systems
Natural satellites
Neutron star systems
Red dwarf systems
K-type main-sequence star systems
Yellow dwarf systems
F-type main-sequence star systems

vte

Astrobiology (also xenology or exobiology) is a scientific field within the life and environmental sciences that studies the origins, early evolution, distribution, and future of life in the universe by investigating its deterministic conditions and contingent events.[2] As a discipline, astrobiology is founded on the premise that life may exist beyond Earth.[3]

Research in astrobiology comprises three main areas: the study of habitable environments in the Solar System and beyond, the search for planetary biosignatures of past or present extraterrestrial life, and the study of the origin and early evolution of life on Earth.

The field of astrobiology has its origins in the 20th century with the advent of space exploration and the discovery of exoplanets. Early astrobiology research focused on the search for extraterrestrial life and the study of the potential for life to exist on other planets.[2] In the 1960s and 1970s, NASA began its astrobiology pursuits within  the Viking program, which was the first US mission to land on Mars and search for signs of life.[4] This mission, along with other early space exploration missions, laid the foundation for the development of astrobiology as a discipline.

Regarding habitable environments, astrobiology investigates potential locations beyond Earth that could support life, such as Mars, Europa, and exoplanets, through research into the extremophiles populating austere environments on Earth, like volcanic and deep sea environments. Research within this topic is conducted utilising the methodology of the geosciences, especially geobiology, for astrobiological applications.

The search for biosignatures involves the identification of signs of past or present life in the form of organic compounds, isotopic ratios, or microbial fossils. Research within this topic is conducted utilising the methodology of planetary and environmental science, especially atmospheric science, for astrobiological applications, and is often conducted through remote sensing and in situ missions.

Astrobiology also concerns the study of the origin and early evolution of life on Earth to try to understand the conditions that are necessary for life to form on other planets.[5] This research seeks to understand how life emerged from non-living matter and how it evolved to become the diverse array of organisms we see today. Research within this topic is conducted utilising the methodology of paleosciences, especially paleobiology, for astrobiological applications.

Astrobiology is a rapidly developing field with a strong interdisciplinary aspect that holds many challenges and opportunities for scientists. Astrobiology programs and research centres are present in many universities and research institutions around the world, and space agencies like NASA and ESA have dedicated departments and programs for astrobiology research.

Overview

The term astrobiology was first proposed by the Russian astronomer Gavriil Tikhov in 1953.[6] It is etymologically derived from the Greek ἄστρον, "star"; βίος, "life"; and -λογία, -logia, "study". A close synonym is exobiology from the Greek Έξω, "external"; βίος, "life"; and -λογία, -logia, "study", coined by American molecular biologist Joshua Lederberg; exobiology is considered to have a narrow scope limited to search of life external to Earth.[7] Another associated term is xenobiology, from the Greek ξένος, "foreign"; βίος, "life"; and -λογία, "study", coined by American science fiction writer Robert Heinlein in his 1954 work The Star Beast;[8] xenobiology is now used in a more specialised sense, referring to 'biology based on foreign chemistry', whether of extraterrestrial or terrestrial (typically synthetic) origin.[9]

While the potential for extraterrestrial life, especially intelligent life, has been explored throughout human history within philosophy and narrative, the question is a verifiable hypothesis and thus a valid line of scientific inquiry;[10][11] planetary scientist David Grinspoon calls it a field of natural philosophy, grounding speculation on the unknown in known scientific theory.[12]

The modern field of astrobiology can be traced back to the 1950s and 1960s with the advent of space exploration, when scientists began to seriously consider the possibility of life on other planets. In 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the first artificial satellite, which marked the beginning of the Space Age. This event led to an increase in the study of the potential for life on other planets, as scientists began to consider the possibilities opened up by the new technology of space exploration. In 1959, NASA funded its first exobiology project, and in 1960, NASA founded the Exobiology Program, now one of four main elements of NASA's current Astrobiology Program.[13] In 1971, NASA funded Project Cyclops,[14] part of the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, to search radio frequencies of the electromagnetic spectrum for interstellar communications transmitted by extraterrestrial life outside the Solar System. In the 1960s-1970s, NASA established the Viking program, which was the first US mission to land on Mars and search for metabolic signs of present life; the results were inconclusive.

In the 1980s and 1990s, the field began to expand and diversify as new discoveries and technologies emerged. The discovery of microbial life in extreme environments on Earth, such as deep-sea hydrothermal vents, helped to clarify the feasibility of potential life existing in harsh conditions. The development of new techniques for the detection of biosignatures, such as the use of stable isotopes, also played a significant role in the evolution of the field.

The contemporary landscape of astrobiology emerged in the early 21st century, focused on utilising Earth and environmental science for applications within comparate space environments. Missions included the ESA's Beagle 2, which failed minutes after landing on Mars, NASA's Phoenix lander, which probed the environment for past and present planetary habitability of microbial life on Mars and researched the history of water, and NASA's Curiosity rover, currently probing the environment for past and present planetary habitability of microbial life on Mars.

Theoretical foundations

Planetary habitability

Astrobiological research makes a number of simplifying assumptions when studying the necessary components for planetary habitability.

Carbon and Organic Compounds: Carbon is the fourth most abundant element in the universe and the energy required to make or break a bond is at just the appropriate level for building molecules which are not only stable, but also reactive. The fact that carbon atoms bond readily to other carbon atoms allows for the building of extremely long and complex molecules. As such, astrobiological research presumes that the vast majority of life forms in the Milky Way galaxy are based on carbon chemistries, as are all life forms on Earth.[15][16] However, theoretical astrobiology entertains the potential for other organic molecular bases for life, thus astrobiological research often focuses on identifying environments that have the potential to support life based on the presence of organic compounds.

Liquid water: Liquid water is a common molecule that provides an excellent environment for the formation of complicated carbon-based molecules, and is generally considered necessary for life as we know it to exist. Thus, astrobiological research presumes that extraterrestrial life similarly depends upon access to liquid water, and often focuses on identifying environments that have the potential to support liquid water.[17][18] Some researchers posit environments of water-ammonia mixtures as possible solvents for hypothetical types of biochemistry.[19]

Environmental stability: Where organisms adaptively evolve to the conditions of the environments in which they reside, environmental stability is considered necessary for life to exist. This presupposes the necessity of a stable temperature, pressure, and radiation levels; resultantly, astrobiological research focuses on planets orbiting Sun-like red dwarf stars.[20][16] This is because very large stars have relatively short lifetimes, meaning that life might not have time to emerge on planets orbiting them; very small stars provide so little heat and warmth that only planets in very close orbits around them would not be frozen solid, and in such close orbits these planets would be tidally locked to the star;[21] whereas the long lifetimes of red dwarfs could allow the development of habitable environments on planets with thick atmospheres.[22] This is significant as red dwarfs are extremely common. (See also: Habitability of red dwarf systems).

Energy source: It is assumed that any life elsewhere in the universe would also require an energy source. Previously, it was assumed that this would necessarily be from a Sun-like star, however with developments within extremophile research contemporary astrobiological research often focuses on identifying environments that have the potential to support life based on the availability of an energy source, such as the presence of volcanic activity on a planet or moon that could provide a source of heat and energy.

It is important to note that these assumptions are based on our current understanding of life on Earth and the conditions under which it can exist. As our understanding of life and the potential for it to exist in different environments evolves, these assumptions may change.

Methods

Studying terrestrial extremophiles

Astrobiological research concerning the study of habitable environments in our solar system and beyond utilises methods within the geosciences. Research within this branch primarily concerns the geobiology of organisms that can survive in extreme environments on Earth, such as in volcanic or deep sea environments, to understand the limits of life, and the conditions under which life might be able to survive on other planets. This includes, but is not limited to:

Deep-sea extremophiles: Researchers are studying organisms that live in the extreme environments of deep-sea hydrothermal vents and cold seeps.[23] These organisms survive in the absence of sunlight, and some are able to survive in high temperatures and pressures, and use chemical energy instead of sunlight to produce food.

Desert extremophiles: Researchers are studying organisms that can survive in extreme dry, high temperature conditions, such as in deserts.[24]

Microbes in extreme environments: Researchers are investigating the diversity and activity of microorganisms in environments such as deep mines, subsurface soil, cold glaciers[25] and polar ice,[26] and high-altitude environments.

Researching Earth's present environment

Research also regards the long-term survival of life on Earth, and the possibilities and hazards of life on other planets, including:

Biodiversity and ecosystem resilience: Scientists are studying how the diversity of life and the interactions between different species contribute to the resilience of ecosystems and their ability to recover from disturbances.[27]

Climate change and extinction: Researchers are investigating the impacts of climate change on different species and ecosystems, and how they may lead to extinction or adaptation.[28] This includes the evolution of Earth's climate and geology, and their potential impact on the habitability of the planet in the future, especially for humans.

Human impact on the biosphere: Scientists are studying the ways in which human activities, such as deforestation, pollution, and the introduction of invasive species, are affecting the biosphere and the long-term survival of life on Earth.[29]

Long-term preservation of life: Researchers are exploring ways to preserve samples of life on Earth for long periods of time, such as cryopreservation and genomic preservation, in the event of a catastrophic event that could wipe out most of life on Earth.[30]

Finding biosignatures on other worlds

Emerging astrobiological research concerning the search for planetary biosignatures of past or present extraterrestrial life utilise methodologies within planetary sciences. These include:

The study of microbial life in the subsurface of Mars:

Scientists are using data from Mars rover missions to study the composition of the subsurface of Mars, searching for biosignatures of past or present microbial life.[31]
The study of liquid bodies on icy moons:

Discoveries of surface and subsurface bodies of liquid on moons such as Europa,[32][33][34] Titan[35] and Enceladus[36][37] showed possible habitability zones, making them viable targets for the search for extraterrestrial life. As of September 2024[update], missions like Europa Clipper and Dragonfly are planned to search for biosignatures within these environments.

The study of the atmospheres of planets:

Scientists are studying the potential for life to exist in the atmospheres of planets, with a focus on the study of the physical and chemical conditions necessary for such life to exist, namely the detection of organic molecules and biosignature gases; for example, the study of the possibility of life in the atmospheres of exoplanets that orbit red dwarfs and the study of the potential for microbial life in the upper atmosphere of Venus.[38]

Telescopes and remote sensing of exoplanets: The discovery of thousands of exoplanets has opened up new opportunities for the search for biosignatures. Scientists are using telescopes such as the James Webb Space Telescope and the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite to search for biosignatures on exoplanets. They are also developing new techniques for the detection of biosignatures, such as the use of remote sensing to search for biosignatures in the atmosphere of exoplanets.[39]

Talking to extraterrestrials

Scientists search for signals from intelligent extraterrestrial civilizations using radio and optical telescopes within the discipline of extraterrestrial intelligence communications (CETI). CETI focuses on composing and deciphering messages that could theoretically be understood by another technological civilization. Communication attempts by humans have included broadcasting mathematical languages, pictorial systems such as the Arecibo message, and computational approaches to detecting and deciphering 'natural' language communication. While some high-profile scientists, such as Carl Sagan, have advocated the transmission of messages,[40][41] theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking warned against it, suggesting that aliens may raid Earth for its resources.[42]

Investigating the early Earth

Emerging astrobiological research concerning the study of the origin and early evolution of life on Earth utilises methodologies within the palaeosciences. These include:

The study of the early atmosphere: Researchers are investigating the role of the early atmosphere in providing the right conditions for the emergence of life, such as the presence of gases that could have helped to stabilise the climate and the formation of organic molecules.[43]

The study of the early magnetic field: Researchers are investigating the role of the early magnetic field in protecting the Earth from harmful radiation and helping to stabilise the climate.[44] This research has immense astrobiological implications where the subjects of current astrobiological research like Mars lack such a field.

The study of prebiotic chemistry: Scientists are studying the chemical reactions that could have occurred on the early Earth that led to the formation of the building blocks of life- amino acids, nucleotides, and lipids- and how these molecules could have formed spontaneously under early Earth conditions.[45]

The study of impact events: Scientists are investigating the potential role of impact events- especially meteorites- in the delivery of water and organic molecules to early Earth.[46]

The study of the primordial soup:

Researchers are investigating the conditions and ingredients that were present on the early Earth that could have led to the formation of the first living organisms, such as the presence of water and organic molecules, and how these ingredients could have led to the formation of the first living organisms.[47] This includes the role of water in the formation of the first cells and in catalysing chemical reactions.

The study of the role of minerals: Scientists are investigating the role of minerals like clay in catalysing the formation of organic molecules, thus playing a role in the emergence of life on Earth.[48]

The study of the role of energy and electricity: Scientists are investigating the potential sources of energy and electricity that could have been available on the early Earth, and their role in the formation of organic molecules, thus the emergence of life.[49]

The study of the early oceans: Scientists are investigating the composition and chemistry of the early oceans and how it may have played a role in the emergence of life, such as the presence of dissolved minerals that could have helped to catalyse the formation of organic molecules.[50]

The study of hydrothermal vents: Scientists are investigating the potential role of hydrothermal vents in the origin of life, as these environments may have provided the energy and chemical building blocks needed for its emergence.[51]

The study of plate tectonics: Scientists are investigating the role of plate tectonics in creating a diverse range of environments on the early Earth.[52]

The study of the early biosphere: Researchers are investigating the diversity and activity of microorganisms in the early Earth, and how these organisms may have played a role in the emergence of life.[53]

The study of microbial fossils: Scientists are investigating the presence of microbial fossils in ancient rocks, which can provide clues about the early evolution of life on Earth and the emergence of the first organisms.[54]

Research

The systematic search for possible life outside Earth is a valid multidisciplinary scientific endeavor.[55] However, hypotheses and predictions as to its existence and origin vary widely, and at the present, the development of hypotheses firmly grounded on science may be considered astrobiology's most concrete practical application. It has been proposed that viruses are likely to be encountered on other life-bearing planets,[56][57] and may be present even if there are no biological cells.[58]

Research outcomes

As of 2024[update], no evidence of extraterrestrial life has been identified.[59] Examination of the Allan Hills 84001 meteorite, which was recovered in Antarctica in 1984 and originated from Mars, is thought by David McKay, as well as few other scientists, to contain microfossils of extraterrestrial origin; this interpretation is controversial.[60][61][62]

Yamato 000593, the second largest meteorite from Mars, was found on Earth in 2000. At a microscopic level, spheres are found in the meteorite that are rich in carbon compared to surrounding areas that lack such spheres. The carbon-rich spheres may have been formed by biotic activity according to some NASA scientists.[63][64][65]

On 5 March 2011, Richard B. Hoover, a scientist with the Marshall Space Flight Center, speculated on the finding of alleged microfossils similar to cyanobacteria in CI1 carbonaceous meteorites in the fringe Journal of Cosmology, a story widely reported on by mainstream media.[66][67] However, NASA formally distanced itself from Hoover's claim.[68] According to American astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson: "At the moment, life on Earth is the only known life in the universe, but there are compelling arguments to suggest we are not alone."[69]

Elements of astrobiology

Most astronomy-related astrobiology research falls into the category of extrasolar planet (exoplanet) detection, the hypothesis being that if life arose on Earth, then it could also arise on other planets with similar characteristics. To that end, a number of instruments designed to detect Earth-sized exoplanets have been considered, most notably NASA's Terrestrial Planet Finder (TPF) and ESA's Darwin programs, both of which have been cancelled. NASA launched the Kepler mission in March 2009, and the French Space Agency launched the COROT space mission in 2006.[70][71] There are also several less ambitious ground-based efforts underway.

The goal of these missions is not only to detect Earth-sized planets but also to directly detect light from the planet so that it may be studied spectroscopically. By examining planetary spectra, it would be possible to determine the basic composition of an extrasolar planet's atmosphere and/or surface.[72] Given this knowledge, it may be possible to assess the likelihood of life being found on that planet. A NASA research group, the Virtual Planet Laboratory,[73] is using computer modeling to generate a wide variety of virtual planets to see what they would look like if viewed by TPF or Darwin. It is hoped that once these missions come online, their spectra can be cross-checked with these virtual planetary spectra for features that might indicate the presence of life.

An estimate for the number of planets with intelligent communicative extraterrestrial life can be gleaned from the Drake equation, essentially an equation expressing the probability of intelligent life as the product of factors such as the fraction of planets that might be habitable and the fraction of planets on which life might arise:[74]

where:

N = The number of communicative civilizations
R* = The rate of formation of suitable stars (stars such as the Sun)
fp = The fraction of those stars with planets (current evidence indicates that planetary systems may be common for stars like the Sun)
ne = The number of Earth-sized worlds per planetary system
fl = The fraction of those Earth-sized planets where life actually develops
fi = The fraction of life sites where intelligence develops
fc = The fraction of communicative planets (those on which electromagnetic communications technology develops)
L = The "lifetime" of communicating civilizations

However, whilst the rationale behind the equation is sound, it is unlikely that the equation will be constrained to reasonable limits of error any time soon. The problem with the formula is that it is not used to generate or support hypotheses because it contains factors that can never be verified. The first term, R*, number of stars, is generally constrained within a few orders of magnitude. The second and third terms, fp, stars with planets and fe, planets with habitable conditions, are being evaluated for the star's neighborhood. Drake originally formulated the equation merely as an agenda for discussion at the Green Bank conference,[75] but some applications of the formula had been taken literally and related to simplistic or pseudoscientific arguments.[76] Another associated topic is the Fermi paradox, which suggests that if intelligent life is common in the universe, then there should be obvious signs of it.

Another active research area in astrobiology is planetary system formation. It has been suggested that the peculiarities of the Solar System (for example, the presence of Jupiter as a protective shield)[77] may have greatly increased the probability of intelligent life arising on Earth.[78][79]

Biology cannot state that a process or phenomenon, by being mathematically possible, has to exist forcibly in an extraterrestrial body. Biologists specify what is speculative and what is not.[76] The discovery of extremophiles, organisms able to survive in extreme environments, became a core research element for astrobiologists, as they are important to understand four areas in the limits of life in planetary context: the potential for panspermia, forward contamination due to human exploration ventures, planetary colonization by humans, and the exploration of extinct and extant extraterrestrial life.[80]

Until the 1970s, life was thought to be entirely dependent on energy from the Sun. Plants on Earth's surface capture energy from sunlight to photosynthesize sugars from carbon dioxide and water, releasing oxygen in the process that is then consumed by oxygen-respiring organisms, passing their energy up the food chain. Even life in the ocean depths, where sunlight cannot reach, was thought to obtain its nourishment either from consuming organic detritus rained down from the surface waters or from eating animals that did.[81] The world's ability to support life was thought to depend on its access to sunlight. However, in 1977, during an exploratory dive to the Galapagos Rift in the deep-sea exploration submersible Alvin, scientists discovered colonies of giant tube worms, clams, crustaceans, mussels, and other assorted creatures clustered around undersea volcanic features known as black smokers.[81] These creatures thrive despite having no access to sunlight, and it was soon discovered that they form an entirely independent ecosystem. Although most of these multicellular lifeforms need dissolved oxygen (produced by oxygenic photosynthesis) for their aerobic cellular respiration and thus are not completely independent from sunlight by themselves, the basis for their food chain is a form of bacterium that derives its energy from oxidization of reactive chemicals, such as hydrogen or hydrogen sulfide, that bubble up from the Earth's interior. Other lifeforms entirely decoupled from the energy from sunlight are green sulfur bacteria which are capturing geothermal light for anoxygenic photosynthesis or bacteria running chemolithoautotrophy based on the radioactive decay of uranium.[82] This chemosynthesis revolutionized the study of biology and astrobiology by revealing that life need not be sunlight-dependent; it only requires water and an energy gradient in order to exist.

Biologists have found extremophiles that thrive in ice, boiling water, acid, alkali, the water core of nuclear reactors, salt crystals, toxic waste and in a range of other extreme habitats that were previously thought to be inhospitable for life.[83][84] This opened up a new avenue in astrobiology by massively expanding the number of possible extraterrestrial habitats. Characterization of these organisms, their environments and their evolutionary pathways, is considered a crucial component to understanding how life might evolve elsewhere in the universe. For example, some organisms able to withstand exposure to the vacuum and radiation of outer space include the lichen fungi Rhizocarpon geographicum and Rusavskia elegans,[85] the bacterium Bacillus safensis,[86] Deinococcus radiodurans,[86] Bacillus subtilis,[86] yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae,[86] seeds from Arabidopsis thaliana ('mouse-ear cress'),[86] as well as the invertebrate animal Tardigrade.[86] While tardigrades are not considered true extremophiles, they are considered extremotolerant microorganisms that have contributed to the field of astrobiology. Their extreme radiation tolerance and presence of DNA protection proteins may provide answers as to whether life can survive away from the protection of the Earth's atmosphere.[87]

Jupiter's moon, Europa,[84][88][89][90][91] and Saturn's moon, Enceladus,[92][36] are now considered the most likely locations for extant extraterrestrial life in the Solar System due to their subsurface water oceans where radiogenic and tidal heating enables liquid water to exist.[82]

The origin of life, known as abiogenesis, distinct from the evolution of life, is another ongoing field of research. Oparin and Haldane postulated that the conditions on the early Earth were conducive to the formation of organic compounds from inorganic elements and thus to the formation of many of the chemicals common to all forms of life we see today. The study of this process, known as prebiotic chemistry, has made some progress, but it is still unclear whether or not life could have formed in such a manner on Earth. The alternative hypothesis of panspermia is that the first elements of life may have formed on another planet with even more favorable conditions (or even in interstellar space, asteroids, etc.) and then have been carried over to Earth.

The cosmic dust permeating the universe contains complex organic compounds ("amorphous organic solids with a mixed aromatic-aliphatic structure") that could be created naturally, and rapidly, by stars.[93][94][95] Further, a scientist suggested that these compounds may have been related to the development of life on Earth and said that, "If this is the case, life on Earth may have had an easier time getting started as these organics can serve as basic ingredients for life."[93]

More than 20% of the carbon in the universe may be associated with polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), possible starting materials for the formation of life. PAHs seem to have been formed shortly after the Big Bang, are widespread throughout the universe, and are associated with new stars and exoplanets.[96] PAHs are subjected to interstellar medium conditions and are transformed through hydrogenation, oxygenation and hydroxylation, to more complex organics—"a step along the path toward amino acids and nucleotides, the raw materials of proteins and DNA, respectively".[97][98]

In October 2020, astronomers proposed the idea of detecting life on distant planets by studying the shadows of trees at certain times of the day to find patterns that could be detected through observation of exoplanets.[99][100]

Philosophy

David Grinspoon called astrobiology a field of natural philosophy.[101] Astrobiology intersects with philosophy by raising questions about the nature and existence of life beyond Earth. Philosophical implications include the definition of life itself, issues in the philosophy of mind and cognitive science in case intelligent life is found, epistemological questions about the nature of proof, ethical considerations of space exploration, along with the broader impact of discovering extraterrestrial life on human thought and society.

Dunér[102] has emphasized philosophy of astrobiology as an ongoing existential exercise in individual and collective self-understanding, whose major task is constructing and debating concepts such as the concept of life. Key issues, for Dunér, are questions of resource money and monetary planning, epistemological questions regarding astrobiological knowledge, linguistics issues about interstellar communication, cognitive issues such as the definition of intelligence, along with the possibility of interplanetary contamination.
Persson[103] also emphasized key philosophical questions in astrobiology. They include ethical justification of resources, the question of life in general, the epistemological issues and knowledge about being alone in the universe, ethics towards extraterrestrial life, the question of politics and governing uninhabited worlds, along with questions of ecology.

For von Hegner,[104] the question of astrobiology and the possibility of astrophilosophy differs. For him, the discipline needs to bifurcate into astrobiology and astrophilosophy since discussions made possible by astrobiology, but which have been astrophilosophical in nature, have existed as long as there have been discussions about extraterrestrial life. Astrobiology is a self-corrective interaction among observation, hypothesis, experiment, and theory, pertaining to the exploration of all natural phenomena. Astrophilosophy consists of methods of dialectic analysis and logical argumentation, pertaining to the clarification of the nature of reality. Šekrst[105] argues that astrobiology requires the affirmation of astrophilosophy, but not as a separate cognate to astrobiology. The stance of conceptual speciesm, according to Šekrst, permeates astrobiology since the very name astrobiology tries to talk about not just biology, but about life in a general way, which includes terrestrial life as a subset. This leads us to either redefine philosophy, or consider the need for astrophilosophy as a more general discipline, to which philosophy is just a subset that deals with questions such as the nature of the human mind and other anthropocentric questions.

Most of the philosophy of astrobiology deals with two main questions: the question of life and the ethics of space exploration. Kolb[106] specifically emphasizes the question of viruses, for which the question whether they are alive or not is based on the definitions of life that include self-replication. Schneider[107] tried to defined exo-life, but concluded that we often start with our own prejudices and that defining extraterrestrial life seems futile using human concepts. For Dick, astrobiology relies on metaphysical assumption that there is extraterrestrial life, which reaffirms questions in the philosophy of cosmology, such as fine-tuning or the anthropic principle.

Rare Earth hypothesis

The Rare Earth hypothesis postulates that multicellular life forms found on Earth may actually be more of a rarity than scientists assume. According to this hypothesis, life on Earth (and more, multi-cellular life) is possible because of a conjunction of the right circumstances (galaxy and location within it, planetary system, star, orbit, planetary size, atmosphere, etc.); and the chance for all those circumstances to repeat elsewhere may be rare. It provides a possible answer to the Fermi paradox which wonders: if extraterrestrial aliens are common, why aren't they obvious?  It is apparently in opposition to the principle of mediocrity, assumed by famed astronomers Frank Drake, Carl Sagan, and others. The principle of mediocrity suggests that life on Earth is not exceptional, and it is more than likely to be found on innumerable other worlds.

Missions

Research into the environmental limits of life and the workings of extreme ecosystems is ongoing, enabling researchers to better predict what planetary environments might be most likely to harbor life. Missions such as the Phoenix lander, Mars Science Laboratory, ExoMars, Mars 2020 rover to Mars, and the Cassini probe to Saturn's moons aim to further explore the possibilities of life on other planets in the Solar System.

The two Viking landers each carried four types of biological experiments to the surface of Mars in the late 1970s. These were the only Mars landers to carry out experiments looking specifically for metabolism by current microbial life on Mars. The landers used a robotic arm to collect soil samples into sealed test containers on the craft. The two landers were identical, so the same tests were carried out at two places on Mars' surface; Viking 1 near the equator and Viking 2 further north.[108] The result was inconclusive,[109] and is still disputed by some scientists.[110][111][112][113]

Norman Horowitz was the chief of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory bioscience section for the Mariner and Viking missions from 1965 to 1976.  Horowitz considered that the great versatility of the carbon atom makes it the element most likely to provide solutions, even exotic solutions, to the problems of survival of life on other planets.[114]  However, he also considered that the conditions found on Mars were incompatible with carbon based life.

Beagle 2 was an unsuccessful British Mars lander that formed part of the European Space Agency's 2003 Mars Express mission. Its primary purpose was to search for signs of life on Mars, past or present. Although it landed safely, it was unable to correctly deploy its solar panels and telecom antenna.[115]

EXPOSE is a multi-user facility mounted in 2008 outside the International Space Station dedicated to astrobiology.[116][117] EXPOSE was developed by the European Space Agency (ESA) for long-term spaceflights that allow exposure of organic chemicals and biological samples to outer space in low Earth orbit.[118]

The Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) mission landed the Curiosity rover that is currently in operation on Mars.[119] It was launched 26 November 2011, and landed at Gale Crater on 6 August 2012. Mission objectives are to help assess Mars' habitability and in doing so, determine whether Mars is or has ever been able to support life,[120] collect data for a future human mission, study Martian geology, its climate, and further assess the role that water, an essential ingredient for life as we know it, played in forming minerals on Mars.

The Tanpopo mission is an orbital astrobiology experiment investigating the potential interplanetary transfer of life, organic compounds, and possible terrestrial particles in the low Earth orbit. The purpose is to assess the panspermia hypothesis and the possibility of natural interplanetary transport of microbial life as well as prebiotic organic compounds. Early mission results show evidence that some clumps of microorganism can survive for at least one year in space.[121] This may support the idea that clumps greater than 0.5 millimeters of microorganisms could be one way for life to spread from planet to planet.[121]

ExoMars is a robotic mission to Mars to search for possible biosignatures of Martian life, past or present. This astrobiological mission was under development by the European Space Agency (ESA) in partnership with the Russian Federal Space Agency (Roscosmos); it was planned for a 2022 launch;[122][123][124] however, technical and funding issues and the Russian invasion of Ukraine have forced ESA to repeatedly delay the rover's delivery to 2028.[125]

Mars 2020 successfully landed its rover Perseverance in Jezero Crater on 18 February 2021. It will investigate environments on Mars relevant to astrobiology, investigate its surface geological processes and history, including the assessment of its past habitability and potential for preservation of biosignatures and biomolecules within accessible geological materials.[126] The Science Definition Team is proposing the rover collect and package at least 31 samples of rock cores and soil for a later mission to bring back for more definitive analysis in laboratories on Earth. The rover could make measurements and technology demonstrations to help designers of a human expedition understand any hazards posed by Martian dust and demonstrate how to collect carbon dioxide (CO2), which could be a resource for making molecular oxygen (O2) and rocket fuel.[127][128]

Europa Clipper is a mission launched by NASA on 14 October 2024 that will conduct detailed reconnaissance of Jupiter's moon Europa beginning in 2030, and will investigate whether its internal ocean could harbor conditions suitable for life.[129][130][131] It will also aid in the selection of future landing sites.[132][133]

Dragonfly is a NASA mission scheduled to land on Titan in 2036 to assess its microbial habitability and study its prebiotic chemistry. Dragonfly is a rotorcraft lander that will perform controlled flights between multiple locations on the surface, which allows sampling of diverse regions and geological contexts.[134]

Proposed concepts

Icebreaker Life is a lander mission that was proposed for NASA's Discovery Program for the 2021 launch opportunity,[135] but it was not selected for development. It would have had a stationary lander that would be a near copy of the successful 2008 Phoenix and it would have carried an upgraded astrobiology scientific payload, including a 1-meter-long core drill to sample ice-cemented ground in the northern plains to conduct a search for organic molecules and evidence of current or past life on Mars.[136][137] One of the key goals of the Icebreaker Life mission is to test the hypothesis that the ice-rich ground in the polar regions has significant concentrations of organics due to protection by the ice from oxidants and radiation.

Journey to Enceladus and Titan (JET) is an astrobiology mission concept to assess the habitability potential of Saturn's moons Enceladus and Titan by means of an orbiter.[138][139][140]

Enceladus Life Finder (ELF) is a proposed astrobiology mission concept for a space probe intended to assess the habitability of the internal aquatic ocean of Enceladus, Saturn's sixth-largest moon.[141][142]

Life Investigation For Enceladus (LIFE) is a proposed astrobiology sample-return mission concept. The spacecraft would enter into Saturn orbit and enable multiple flybys through Enceladus' icy plumes to collect icy plume particles and volatiles and return them to Earth on a capsule. The spacecraft may sample Enceladus' plumes, the E ring of Saturn, and the upper atmosphere of Titan.[143][144][145]

Oceanus is an orbiter proposed in 2017 for the New Frontiers mission No. 4. It would travel to the moon of Saturn, Titan, to assess its habitability.[146] Oceanus' objectives are to reveal Titan's organic chemistry, geology, gravity, topography, collect 3D reconnaissance data, catalog the organics and determine where they may interact with liquid water.[147]

Explorer of Enceladus and Titan (E2T) is an orbiter mission concept that would investigate the evolution and habitability of the Saturnian satellites Enceladus and Titan. The mission concept was proposed in 2017 by the European Space Agency.[148]

See also

Abiogenesis – Life arising from non-living matter
Active SETI – Attempt to send messages to intelligent extraterrestrials
Astrobotany – Study of plants grown in spacecraft
Astrochemistry – Study of molecules in the Universe and their reactions
Astrovirology – Study of viruses in a planetary sciences framing
Cosmic dust – Dust floating in space
Detecting Earth from distant star-based systems – Detecting Earth as an exoplanet
Exoplanetology
Extraterrestrial life – Life that does not originate on Earth
Extraterrestrial sample curation – Use and preservation of extraterrestrial samples
Forward-contamination – Biological contamination of a planetary body by a space probe or spacecraftPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Hypothetical types of biochemistry – Possible alternative biochemicals used by life forms
List of microorganisms tested in outer space
MERMOZ – Way of remotely detecting living matter
Nexus for Exoplanet System Science – Dedicated to the search for life on exoplanets
Planetary habitability – Known extent to which a planet is suitable for life
Planetary protection – Prevention of interplanetary biological contamination
Planet Simulator – Machine designed to study life in the universe
Quiet and loud aliens – Concept in astrobiology
Synthetic biology – Interdisciplinary branch of biology and engineering
The Living Cosmos
Xenobiology – Science of synthetic life forms

Citations

^ "Launching the Alien Debates (part 1 of 7)". Astrobiology Magazine. NASA. 8 December 2006. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2014.

^ a b "About Astrobiology". NASA Astrobiology Institute. NASA. 21 January 2008. Archived from the original on 11 October 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ "About Astrobiology". NASA Astrobiology Institute. NASA. Retrieved 29 January 2023.

^ Steven J. Dick & James E. Strick (2004). The Living Universe: NASA and the Development of Astrobiology. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

^ "Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres". Journal: Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres. Retrieved 6 April 2015.

^ Cockell, Charles S. (2001). "'Astrobiology' and the ethics of new science". Interdisciplinary Science Reviews. 26 (2): 90–96. doi:10.1179/0308018012772533.

^ Launching a New Science: Exobiology and the Exploration of Space The National Library of Medicine.

^ Heinlein R, Harold W (21 July 1961). "Xenobiology". Science. 134 (3473): 223–225. Bibcode:1961Sci...134..223H. doi:10.1126/science.134.3473.223. JSTOR 1708323. PMID 17818726.

^ Markus Schmidt (9 March 2010). "Xenobiology: A new form of life as the ultimate biosafety tool". BioEssays. 32 (4): 322–331. doi:10.1002/bies.200900147. PMC 2909387. PMID 20217844.

^ Livio, Mario (15 February 2017). "Winston Churchill's essay on alien life found". Nature. 542 (7641): 289–291. Bibcode:2017Natur.542..289L. doi:10.1038/542289a. PMID 28202987. S2CID 205092694.

^ De Freytas-Tamura, Kimiko (15 February 2017). "Winston Churchill Wrote of Alien Life in a Lost Essay". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 January 2022. Retrieved 18 February 2017.

^ Grinspoon 2004

^ Hubbard, G. Scott. "Astrobiology: Its Origins and Development". NASA. Archived from the original on 28 June 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2023.

^ "Project Cyclops: a Design Study of a System for Detecting Extraterrestrial Intelligent Life". NASA. January 1972. Retrieved 29 January 2023.

^ "Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons: An Interview With Dr. Farid Salama". Astrobiology Magazine. 2000. Archived from the original on 20 June 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ a b Pace, Norman R. (30 January 2001). "The universal nature of biochemist ry". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA. 98 (3): 805–808. Bibcode:2001PNAS...98..805P. doi:10.1073/pnas.98.3.805. PMC 33372. PMID 11158550.

^ Astrobiology. Macmillan Science Library: Space Sciences. 2006. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ Camprubi, Eloi; et al. (12 December 2019). "Emergence of Life". Space Science Reviews. 215 (56): 56. Bibcode:2019SSRv..215...56C. doi:10.1007/s11214-019-0624-8.

^ Penn State (19 August 2006). "The Ammonia-Oxidizing Gene". Astrobiology Magazine. Archived from the original on 4 August 2011. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ "Stars and Habitable Planets". Sol Company. 2007. Archived from the original on 1 October 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ "M Dwarfs: The Search for Life is On: Interview with Todd Henry". Space News. 5 September 2005. Retrieved 11 March 2025.

^ Mautner, Michael N. (2005). "Life in the cosmological future: Resources, biomass and populations" (PDF). Journal of the British Interplanetary Society. 58: 167–180. Bibcode:2005JBIS...58..167M. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ "Life in the Extreme: Hydrothermal Vents". NASA Astrobiology Institute. NASA. Retrieved 29 January 2023.

^ Merino, Nancy; Aronson, Heidi S.; Bojanova, Diana P.; Feyhl-Buska, Jayme; Wong, Michael L.; Zhang, Shu; Giovannelli, Donato (15 April 2019). "Living at the Extremes: Extremophiles and the Limits of Life in a Planetary Context". Frontiers in Microbiology. 10: 780. Bibcode:2019FrMic..10..780M. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2019.00780. PMC 6476344. PMID 31037068.

^ Mykytczuk, N. C.; Foote, S. J.; Omelon, C. R.; Southam, G.; Greer, C. W.; Whyte, L. G. (7 February 2013). "Microbial Ecology and Functional Diversity of Natural Habitats". The ISME Journal. 7 (6): 1211–1226. doi:10.1038/ismej.2013.8. PMC 3660685. PMID 23389107.

^ Cheptsov, V. S.; Vorobyova, E. A.; Polyanskaya, L. M.; Gorlenko, M. V.; Pavlov, A. K.; Lomasov, V. N. (28 September 2018). "Sustainability of Extreme Microbial Ecosystems to the Comprehensive Impact of Physical Factors of the Martian Regolith". Moscow University Soil Science Bulletin. 73 (3): 119–123. Bibcode:2018MUSSB..73..119C. doi:10.3103/S0147687418030043. S2CID 135443326.

^ "Astrobiology Objectives: Microbial Ecology". Astrobiology at NASA. NASA. Retrieved 29 January 2023.

^ "Effects of Climate and Geology on Habitability". Astrobiology at NASA. NASA. Retrieved 29 January 2023.

^ "Earth's Future Habitability". Astrobiology at NASA. NASA. Retrieved 29 January 2023.

^ "Bringing Life with Us beyond Earth". Astrobiology at NASA. NASA. Retrieved 29 January 2023.

^ Tarnas, J.D.; Mustard, J.F.; Sherwood Lollar, B.; Stamenković, V.; Cannon, K.M.; Lorand, J.-P.; Onstott, T.C.; Michalski, J.R.; Warr, O.; Palumbo, A.M.; Plesa, A.-C. (11 June 2021). "Earth-like Habitable Environments in the Subsurface of Mars" (PDF). Astrobiology. 21 (6): 741–756. Bibcode:2021AsBio..21..741T. doi:10.1089/ast.2020.2386. PMID 33885329. S2CID 233352375.

^ Tritt, Charles S. (2002). "Possibility of Life on Europa". Milwaukee School of Engineering. Archived from the original on 9 June 2007. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ Friedman, Louis (14 December 2005). "Projects: Europa Mission Campaign". The Planetary Society. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ David, Leonard (10 November 1999). "Move Over Mars – Europa Needs Equal Billing". Space.com. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ "Life on Titan?". ESA. Retrieved 31 August 2024.

^ a b Kazan, Casey (2 June 2011). "Saturn's Enceladus Moves to Top of "Most-Likely-to-Have-Life" List". The Daily Galaxy. Retrieved 3 June 2011.

^ Lovett, Richard A. (31 May 2011). "Enceladus named sweetest spot for alien life". Nature. doi:10.1038/news.2011.337. Retrieved 3 June 2011.

^ Limaye, Sanjay S.; Mogul, Rakesh; Baines, Kevin H.; Bullock, Mark A.; Cockell, Charles; Cutts, James A.; Gentry, Diana M.; Grinspoon, David H.; Head, James W.; Jessup, Kandis-Lea; Kompanichenko, Vladimir; Lee, Yeon Joo; Mathies, Richard; Milojevic, Tetyana; Pertzborn, Rosalyn A.; Rothschild, Lynn; Sasaki, Satoshi; Schulze-Makuch, Dirk; Smith, David J.; Way, Michael J. (7 October 2021). "Venus, an Astrobiology Target". Astrobiology. 21 (10): 1163–1185. Bibcode:2021AsBio..21.1163L. doi:10.1089/ast.2020.2268. PMID 33970019. S2CID 234344026.

^ Seager, Sara (4 August 2014). "The future of spectroscopic life detection on exoplanets". PNAS. 111 (35): 12634–12640. Bibcode:2014PNAS..11112634S. doi:10.1073/pnas.1304213111. PMC 4156723. PMID 25092345.

^ Sagan, Carl. Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence. MIT Press, 1973, 428 pp.

^ "You Never Get a Seventh Chance to Make a First Impression: An Awkward History of Our Space Transmissions". Lightspeed Magazine. March 2011. Retrieved 13 March 2015.

^ "Stephen Hawking: Humans Should Fear Aliens". Huffington Post. 25 June 2010. Retrieved 27 May 2017.

^ Zahnle, K.; Schaefer, L.; Fegley, B. (October 2010). "Earth's Earliest Atmospheres". Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology. 2 (10): a004895. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a004895. PMC 2944365. PMID 20573713.

^ Tarduno, John A.; Cottrell, Rory D.; Bono, Richard K.; Oda, Hirokuni; Davis, William J.; Fayek, Mostafa; Erve, Olaf van 't; Nimmo, Francis; Huang, Wentao; Thern, Eric R.; Fearn, Sebastian; Mitra, Gautam; Smirnov, Aleksey V.; Blackman, Eric G. (21 January 2020). "Paleomagnetism indicates that primary magnetite in zircon records a strong Hadean geodynamo". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 117 (5): 2309–2318. Bibcode:2020PNAS..117.2309T. doi:10.1073/pnas.1916553117. PMC 7007582. PMID 31964848.

^ Müller, Ulrich F.; Elsila, Jamie; Trail, Dustin; Dasgupta, Saurja; Giese, Claudia-Corina; Walton, Craig R.; Cohen, Zachary R.; Stolar, Tomislav; Krishnamurthy, Ramanarayanan; Lyons, Timothy W.; Rogers, Karyn L.; Williams, Loren Dean (7 July 2022). "Frontiers in Prebiotic Chemistry and Early Earth Environments". Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres. 52 (1–3): 165–181. Bibcode:2022OLEB...52..165M. doi:10.1007/s11084-022-09622-x. PMC 9261198. PMID 35796897.

^ Osinski, G.R.; Cockell, C.S.; Pontefract, A.; Sapers, H.M. (15 September 2020). "The Role of Meteorite Impacts in the Origin of Life". Astrobiology. 20 (9): 1121–1149. Bibcode:2020AsBio..20.1121O. doi:10.1089/ast.2019.2203. PMC 7499892. PMID 32876492.

^ Rodriguez, Laura E.; House, Christopher H.; Smith, Karen E.; Roberts, Melissa R.; Callahan, Michael P. (26 June 2019). "Nitrogen heterocycles form peptide nucleic acid precursors in complex prebiotic mixtures". Scientific Reports. 9 (1): 9281. Bibcode:2019NatSR...9.9281R. doi:10.1038/s41598-019-45310-z. PMC 6594999. PMID 31243303.

^ Kloprogge, Jacob; Hartman, Hyman (9 February 2022). "Clays and the Origin of Life: The Experiments". Life. 12 (2): 259. Bibcode:2022Life...12..259K. doi:10.3390/life12020259. PMC 8880559. PMID 35207546.

^ Hess, Benjamin; Piazolo, Sandra; Harvey, Jason (16 March 2021). "Lightning strikes as a major facilitator of prebiotic phosphorus reduction on early Earth". Nature Communications. 12 (1): 1535. Bibcode:2021NatCo..12.1535H. doi:10.1038/s41467-021-21849-2. PMC 7966383. PMID 33727565.

^ Kempe, Stephan; Kazmierczak, Jozef (Spring 2002). "Biogenesis and early life on Earth and Europa: favored by an alkaline ocean?". Astrobiology. 2 (1): 123–130. Bibcode:2002AsBio...2..123K. doi:10.1089/153110702753621394. PMID 12449860.

^ "Sources of Organics on Earth". Astrobiology at NASA. NASA. Retrieved 29 January 2023.

^ Satkoski, Aaron M.; Fralick, Philip; Beard, Brian L.; Johnson, Clark M. (15 July 2017). "Initiation of modern-style plate tectonics recorded in Mesoarchean marine chemical sediments". Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta. 209: 216–232. Bibcode:2017GeCoA.209..216S. doi:10.1016/j.gca.2017.04.024.

^ Lindsay, John; McKay, David; Allen, Carlton (Winter 2003). "Earth's Earliest Biosphere—A Proposal to Develop a Collection of Curated Archean Geologic Reference Materials". Astrobiology. 3 (4): 739–758. Bibcode:2003AsBio...3..739L. doi:10.1089/153110703322736060. PMID 14987479.

^ McMahon, Sean (4 December 2019). "Earth's earliest and deepest purported fossils may be iron-mineralized chemical gardens". Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 286 (1916): 1916. doi:10.1098/rspb.2019.2410. PMC 6939263. PMID 31771469. S2CID 208296652.

^ "NASA Astrobiology: Life in the Universe". Archived from the original on 23 March 2008. Retrieved 13 March 2015.

^ Griffin, Dale Warren (14 August 2013). "The Quest for Extraterrestrial Life: What About the Viruses?". Astrobiology. 13 (8): 774–783. Bibcode:2013AsBio..13..774G. doi:10.1089/ast.2012.0959. PMID 23944293.

^ Berliner, Aaron J.; Mochizuki, Tomohiro; Stedman, Kenneth M. (2018). "Astrovirology: Viruses at Large in the Universe". Astrobiology. 18 (2): 207–223. Bibcode:2018AsBio..18..207B. doi:10.1089/ast.2017.1649. PMID 29319335. S2CID 4348200.

^ Janjic, Aleksandar (2018). "The Need for Including Virus Detection Methods in Future Mars Missions". Astrobiology. 18 (12): 1611–1614. Bibcode:2018AsBio..18.1611J. doi:10.1089/ast.2018.1851. S2CID 105299840.

^ "No, NASA Hasn't Found Alien Life". Mike Wall, Space.  26 June 2017.

^ Crenson, Matt (6 August 2006). "Experts: Little Evidence of Life on Mars". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 16 April 2011. Retrieved 8 March 2011.

^ McKay DS; Gibson E. K.; Thomas-Keprta K. L.; Vali H.; Romanek C. S.; Clemett S. J.; Chillier X. D. F.; Maechling C. R.; Zare R. N. (1996). "Search for past life on Mars: Possible relic biogenic activity in Martian meteorite ALH84001". Science. 273 (5277): 924–930. Bibcode:1996Sci...273..924M. doi:10.1126/science.273.5277.924. PMID 8688069. S2CID 40690489.

^ McKay David S.; Thomas-Keprta K. L.; Clemett, S. J.; Gibson, E. K. Jr; Spencer L.; Wentworth S. J. (2009). Hoover, Richard B.; Levin, Gilbert V.; Rozanov, Alexei Y.; Retherford, Kurt D. (eds.). "Life on Mars: new evidence from martian meteorites". Proc. SPIE. Proceedings of SPIE. 7441 (1): 744102. Bibcode:2009SPIE.7441E..02M. doi:10.1117/12.832317. S2CID 123296237. Retrieved 8 March 2011.

^ Webster, Guy (27 February 2014). "NASA Scientists Find Evidence of Water in Meteorite, Reviving Debate Over Life on Mars". NASA. Archived from the original on 1 March 2014. Retrieved 27 February 2014.

^ White, Lauren M.; Gibson, Everett K.; Thomnas-Keprta, Kathie L.; Clemett, Simon J.; McKay, David (19 February 2014). "Putative Indigenous Carbon-Bearing Alteration Features in Martian Meteorite Yamato 000593". Astrobiology. 14 (2): 170–181. Bibcode:2014AsBio..14..170W. doi:10.1089/ast.2011.0733. PMC 3929347. PMID 24552234.

^ Gannon, Megan (28 February 2014). "Mars Meteorite with Odd 'Tunnels' & 'Spheres' Revives Debate Over Ancient Martian Life". Space.com. Retrieved 28 February 2014.

^ Tenney, Garrett (5 March 2011). "Exclusive: NASA Scientist Claims Evidence of Alien Life on Meteorite". Fox News. Archived from the original on 6 March 2011. Retrieved 6 March 2011.

^ Hoover, Richard B. (2011). "Fossils of Cyanobacteria in CI1 Carbonaceous Meteorites: Implications to Life on Comets, Europa, and Enceladus". Journal of Cosmology. 13: xxx. Archived from the original on 8 March 2011. Retrieved 6 March 2011.

^ Sheridan, Kerry (7 March 2011). "NASA shoots down alien fossil claims". ABC News. Archived from the original on 10 March 2011. Retrieved 7 March 2011.

^ Tyson, Neil deGrasse (23 July 2001). "The Search for Life in the Universe". Department of Astrophysics and Hayden Planetarium. NASA. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 7 March 2011.

^ "Kepler Mission". NASA. 2008. Archived from the original on 31 October 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ "The COROT space telescope". CNES. 17 October 2008. Archived from the original on 8 November 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ Gertner, Jon (15 September 2022). "The Search for Intelligent Life Is About to Get a Lot More Interesting - There are an estimated 100 billion galaxies in the universe, home to an unimaginable abundance of planets. And now there are new ways to spot signs of life on them". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 September 2022.

^ "The Virtual Planet Laboratory". NASA. 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ Ford, Steve (August 1995). "What is the Drake Equation?". SETI League. Archived from the original on 29 October 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ Amir Alexander. "The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence: A Short History – Part 7: The Birth of the Drake Equation".

^ a b "Astrobiology". Biology Cabinet. 26 September 2006. Archived from the original on 12 December 2010. Retrieved 17 January 2011.

^ Horner, Jonathan; Barrie Jones (24 August 2007). "Jupiter: Friend or foe?". Europlanet. Archived from the original on 2 February 2012. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ Jakosky, Bruce; David Des Marais; et al. (14 September 2001). "The Role of Astrobiology in Solar System Exploration". NASA. SpaceRef.com. Archived from the original on 4 January 2013. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ Bortman, Henry (29 September 2004). "Coming Soon: "Good" Jupiters". Astrobiology Magazine. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ "Living at the Extremes: Extremophiles and the Limits of Life in a Planetary Context." N. Merino, H.S. Aronson, D. Bojanova, J. Feyhl-Buska, et al. EarthArXiv. February 2019.

^ a b Chamberlin, Sean (1999). "Black Smokers and Giant Worms". Fullerton College. Retrieved 11 February 2011.

^ a b Trixler, F (2013). "Quantum tunnelling to the origin and evolution of life". Current Organic Chemistry. 17 (16): 1758–1770. doi:10.2174/13852728113179990083. PMC 3768233. PMID 24039543.

^ Carey, Bjorn (7 February 2005). "Wild Things: The Most Extreme Creatures". Live Science. Retrieved 20 October 2008.

^ a b Cavicchioli, R. (Fall 2002). "Extremophiles and the search for extraterrestrial life" (PDF). Astrobiology. 2 (3): 281–292. Bibcode:2002AsBio...2..281C. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.472.3179. doi:10.1089/153110702762027862. PMID 12530238. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Young, Kelly (10 November 2005). "Hardy lichen shown to survive in space". New Scientist. Retrieved 17 January 2019.

^ a b c d e f The Planetary Report, Volume XXIX, number 2, March/April 2009, "We make it happen! Who will survive? Ten hardy organisms selected for the LIFE project, by Amir Alexander

^ Hashimoto, T.; Kunieda, T. (2017). "DNA Protection protein, a novel mechanism of radiation tolerance: Lessons from Tardigrades". Life. 7 (2): 26. Bibcode:2017Life....7...26H. doi:10.3390/life7020026. PMC 5492148. PMID 28617314.

^ "Jupiter's Moon Europa Suspected of Fostering Life". Daily University Science News. 2002. Retrieved 8 August 2009.

^ Cavicchioli, R. (Fall 2002). "Extremophiles and the search for extraterrestrial life". Astrobiology. 2 (3): 281–292. Bibcode:2002AsBio...2..281C. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.472.3179. doi:10.1089/153110702762027862. PMID 12530238.

^ David, Leonard (7 February 2006). "Europa Mission: Lost in NASA Budget". Space.com. Retrieved 8 August 2009.

^ "Clues to possible life on Europa may lie buried in Antarctic ice". Marshal Space Flight Center. NASA. 5 March 1998. Archived from the original on 31 July 2009. Retrieved 8 August 2009.

^ Lovett, Richard A. (31 May 2011). "Enceladus named sweetest spot for alien life". Nature. doi:10.1038/news.2011.337. Retrieved 3 June 2011.

^ a b Chow, Denise (26 October 2011). "Discovery: Cosmic Dust Contains Organic Matter from Stars". Space.com. Retrieved 26 October 2011.

^ ScienceDaily Staff (26 October 2011). "Astronomers Discover Complex Organic Matter Exists Throughout the Universe". ScienceDaily. Retrieved 27 October 2011.

^ Kwok, Sun; Zhang, Yong (26 October 2011). "Mixed aromatic–aliphatic organic nanoparticles as carriers of unidentified infrared emission features". Nature. 479 (7371): 80–83. Bibcode:2011Natur.479...80K. doi:10.1038/nature10542. PMID 22031328. S2CID 4419859.

^ Hoover, Rachel (21 February 2014). "Need to Track Organic Nano-Particles Across the Universe? NASA's Got an App for That". NASA. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Retrieved 22 February 2014.

^ Staff (20 September 2012). "NASA Cooks Up Icy Organics to Mimic Life's Origins". Space.com. Retrieved 22 September 2012.

^ Gudipati, Murthy S.; Yang, Rui (1 September 2012). "In-Situ Probing of Radiation-Induced Processing of Organics in Astrophysical Ice Analogs – Novel Laser Desorption Laser Ionization Time-Of-Flight Mass Spectroscopic Studies". The Astrophysical Journal Letters. 756 (1): L24. Bibcode:2012ApJ...756L..24G. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/756/1/L24. S2CID 5541727.

^ Gough, Evan (6 October 2020). "Here's a Clever Idea, Looking for the Shadows of Trees On Exoplanets to Detect Multicellular Life". Universe Today. Retrieved 7 October 2020.

^ Doughty, Christopher E.; et al. (1 October 2020). "Distinguishing multicellular life on exoplanets by testing Earth as an exoplanet". International Journal of Astrobiology. 19 (6): 492–499. arXiv:2002.10368. Bibcode:2020IJAsB..19..492D. doi:10.1017/S1473550420000270.

^ Grinspoon, David (2004). Lonely Planets: The Natural Philosophy of Alien Life. New York: ECCO. ISBN 978-0-06-018540-4.

^ Dunér, David (2013). "Introduction". In Dunér, David (ed.). The History and Philosophy of Astrobiology: Perspectives on Extraterrestrial Life and the Human Mind. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 4.

^ Persson, Erik (2013). "Philosophical Aspects of Astrobiology". In Dunér, David (ed.). The History and Philosophy of Astrobiology: Perspectives on Extraterrestrial Life and the Human Mind. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.

^ Von Egner, Ian (2019). "Astrobiology and astrophilosophy: Subsuming or bifurcating disciplines". Philosophy and Cosmology. 23: 62–79.

^ Kristina Šekrst (26 July 2024). "Astrobiology in Philosophy or Philosophy in Astrobiology". Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy. 20 (2): 405–415.

^ Kolb, Vera (2015). "Philosophy of Astrobiology: Some Recent Developments". In Hoover, Richard B. (ed.). Proc. SPIE 9606, Instruments, Methods, and Missions for Astrobiology XVII. pp. 960605-1 – 960605-6.

^ Schneider, Sean (2013). "Philosophical Problems of the Definition of Extraterrestrial Life and Intelligence". In Dunér, David (ed.). The History and Philosophy of Astrobiology: Perspectives on Extraterrestrial Life and the Human Mind. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 132.

^ Chambers, Paul (1999). Life on Mars; The Complete Story. London: Blandford. ISBN 978-0-7137-2747-0.

^ Levin, G and P. Straaf. 1976. "Viking Labeled Release Biology Experiment: Interim Results". Science: 194. 1322–1329.

^ Bianciardi, Giorgio; Miller, Joseph D.; Straat, Patricia Ann; Levin, Gilbert V. (March 2012). "Complexity Analysis of the Viking Labeled Release Experiments". IJASS. 13 (1): 14–26. Bibcode:2012IJASS..13...14B. doi:10.5139/IJASS.2012.13.1.14.

^ Klotz, Irene (12 April 2012). "Mars Viking Robots 'Found Life'". Discovery News. Archived from the original on 14 April 2012. Retrieved 16 April 2012.

^ Navarro-González, R.; et al. (2006). "The limitations on organic detection in Mars-like soils by thermal volatilization–gas chromatography – MS and their implications for the Viking results". PNAS. 103 (44): 16089–16094. Bibcode:2006PNAS..10316089N. doi:10.1073/pnas.0604210103. PMC 1621051. PMID 17060639.

^ Paepe, Ronald (2007). "The Red Soil on Mars as a proof for water and vegetation" (PDF). Geophysical Research Abstracts. 9 (1794). Archived from the original (PDP) on 13 June 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ Horowitz, N.H. (1986). Utopia and Back and the search for life in the solar system. New York: W.H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 0-7167-1766-2

^ "Beagle 2 : the British led exploration of Mars". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 13 March 2015.

^ Elke Rabbow; Gerda Horneck; Petra Rettberg; Jobst-Ulrich Schott; Corinna Panitz; Andrea L'Afflitto; Ralf von Heise-Rotenburg; Reiner Willnecker; Pietro Baglioni; Jason Hatton; Jan Dettmann; René Demets; Günther Reitz (9 July 2009). "Expose, an Astrobiological Exposure Facility on the International Space Station – from Proposal to Flight" (PDF). Orig Life Evol Biosph. 39 (6): 581–598. Bibcode:2009OLEB...39..581R. doi:10.1007/s11084-009-9173-6. PMID 19629743. S2CID 19749414. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 January 2014. Retrieved 8 July 2013.

^ Karen Olsson-Francis; Charles S. Cockell (23 October 2009). "Experimental methods for studying microbial survival in extraterrestrial environments" (PDF). Journal of Microbiological Methods. 80 (1): 1–13. doi:10.1016/j.mimet.2009.10.004. PMID 19854226. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 September 2013. Retrieved 31 July 2013.

^ "Expose – home page". Centre national d'études spatiales (CNES). Archived from the original on 15 January 2013. Retrieved 8 July 2013.

^ "Name NASA's Next Mars Rover". NASA/JPL. 27 May 2009. Archived from the original on 22 May 2009. Retrieved 27 May 2009.

^ "Mars Science Laboratory: Mission". NASA/JPL. Archived from the original on 5 March 2006. Retrieved 12 March 2010.

^ a b "Early Tanpopo mission results show microbes can survive in space". American Geophysical Union. Geospace. Larry O'Hanlon. 19 May 2017.

^ Amos, Jonathan (15 March 2012). "Europe still keen on Mars missions". BBC News. Retrieved 16 March 2012.

^ Svitak, Amy (16 March 2012). "Europe Joins Russia on Robotic ExoMars". Aviation Week. Retrieved 16 March 2012.[permanent dead link]

^ Selding, Peter B. de (15 March 2012). "ESA Ruling Council OKs ExoMars Funding". Space News. Archived from the original on 6 December 2012. Retrieved 16 March 2012.

^ Foust, Jeff (10 April 2024). "ESA awards contract to Thales Alenia Space to restart ExoMars". SpaceNews. Retrieved 11 April 2024.

^ Cowing, Keith (21 December 2012). "Science Definition Team for the 2020 Mars Rover". NASA. Science Ref. Archived from the original on 3 February 2013. Retrieved 21 December 2012.

^ "Science Team Outlines Goals for NASA's 2020 Mars Rover". Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA. 9 July 2013. Retrieved 10 July 2013.

^ "Mars 2020 Science Definition Team Report – Frequently Asked Questions" (PDF). NASA. 9 July 2013. Retrieved 10 July 2013.

^ "NASA's Europa Clipper launches aboard SpaceX rocket, bound for Jupiter's icy ocean moon". Los Angeles Times. 14 October 2024. Retrieved 14 October 2024.

^ "Europa Clipper". Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA. November 2013. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 13 December 2013.

^ Kane, Van (26 May 2013). "Europa Clipper Update". Future Planetary Exploration. Retrieved 13 December 2013.

^ Pappalardo, Robert T.; S. Vance; F. Bagenal; B.G. Bills; D.L. Blaney; D.D. Blankenship; W.B. Brinckerhoff; et al. (2013). "Science Potential from a Europa Lander" (PDF). Astrobiology. 13 (8): 740–773. Bibcode:2013AsBio..13..740P. doi:10.1089/ast.2013.1003. hdl:1721.1/81431. PMID 23924246. S2CID 10522270. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Senske, D. (2 October 2012), "Europa Mission Concept Study Update", Presentation to Planetary Science Subcommittee (PDF), retrieved 14 December 2013

^ Dragonfly: A Rotorcraft Lander Concept for Scientific Exploration at Titan Ralph D. Lorenz, Elizabeth P. Turtle, Jason W. Barnes, Melissa G. Trainer, Douglas S. Adams, Kenneth E. Hibbard, Colin Z. Sheldon, Kris Zacny, Patrick N. Peplowski, David J. Lawrence, Michael A. Ravine, Timothy G. McGee, Kristin S. Sotzen, Shannon M. MacKenzie, Jack W. Langelaan, Sven Schmitz, Larry S. Wolfarth, and Peter D. Bedini. 2018. Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, 34(3), 374-387

^ Christopher P. McKay; Carol R. Stoker; Brian J. Glass; Arwen I. Davé; Alfonso F. Davila; Jennifer L. Heldmann; et al. (5 April 2013). "The Icebreaker Life Mission to Mars: A Search for Biomolecular Evidence for Life". Astrobiology. 13 (4): 334–353. Bibcode:2013AsBio..13..334M. doi:10.1089/ast.2012.0878. PMID 23560417.

^ Choi, Charles Q. (16 May 2013). "Icebreaker Life Mission". Astrobiology Magazine. Archived from the original on 9 October 2015. Retrieved 1 July 2013.

^ C. P. McKay; Carol R. Stoker; Brian J. Glass; Arwen I. Davé; Alfonso F. Davila; Jennifer L. Heldmann; et al. (2012). "The Icebreaker Life Mission to Mars: A Search for Biochemical Evidence for Life". Concepts and Approaches for Mars Exploration (PDF). Lunar and Planetary Institute. Retrieved 1 July 2013.

^ Sotin, C.; Altwegg, K.; Brown, R.H.; et al. (2011). JET: Journey to Enceladus and Titan (PDF). 42nd Lunar and Planetary Science Conference. Lunar and Planetary Institute. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Kane, Van (3 April 2014). "Discovery Missions for an Icy Moon with Active Plumes". The Planetary Society. Retrieved 9 April 2015.

^ Matousek, Steve; Sotin, Christophe; Goebel, Dan; Lang, Jared (18–21 June 2013). JET: Journey to Enceladus and Titan (PDF). Low Cost Planetary Missions Conference. California Institute of Technology. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 10 April 2015.

^ Lunine, Jonathan I.; Waite, Jack Hunter Jr.; Postberg, Frank; Spilker, Linda J. (2015). Enceladus Life Finder: The search for life in a habitable moon (PDF). 46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference. Houston (TX): Lunar and Planetary Institute. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Clark, Stephen (6 April 2015). "Diverse destinations considered for new interplanetary probe". Space Flight Now. Retrieved 7 April 2015.

^ Tsou, Peter; Brownlee, D.E.; McKay, Christopher; Anbar, A.D.; Yano, H. (August 2012). "Life Investigation For Enceladus A Sample Return Mission Concept in Search for Evidence of Life". Astrobiology. 12 (8): 730–742. Bibcode:2012AsBio..12..730T. doi:10.1089/ast.2011.0813. PMID 22970863.

^ Tsou, Peter; Anbar, Ariel; Atwegg, Kathrin; Porco, Carolyn; Baross, John; McKay, Christopher (2014). "Life – Enceladus Plume Sample Return via Discovery" (PDF). 45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (1777): 2192. Bibcode:2014LPI....45.2192T. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 10 April 2015.

^ Tsou, Peter (2013). "Life Investigation For Enceladus – A Sample Return Mission Concept in Search for Evidence of Life". Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 12 (8): 730–742. Bibcode:2012AsBio..12..730T. doi:10.1089/ast.2011.0813. PMID 22970863. Archived from the original (.doc) on 1 September 2015. Retrieved 10 April 2015.

^ Sotin, C.; Hayes, A.; Malaska, M.; Nimmo, F.; Trainer, M.; Mastrogiuseppe, M.; et al. (20–24 March 2017). Oceanus: A New Frontiers orbiter to study Titan's potential habitability (PDF). 48th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference. The Woodlands, Texas.

^ Tortora, P.; Zannoni, M.; Nimmo, F.; Mazarico, E.; Iess, L.; Sotin, C.; Hayes, A.; Malaska, M. (23–28 April 2017). Titan gravity investigation with the Oceanus mission. 19th EGU General Assembly, EGU2017. EGU General Assembly Conference Abstracts. Vol. 19. p. 17876. Bibcode:2017EGUGA..1917876T.

^ Mitri, Giuseppe; Postberg, Frank; Soderblom, Jason M.; Tobie, Gabriel; Tortora, Paolo; Wurz, Peter; et al. (2017). "Explorer of Enceladus and Titan (E2T): Investigating the habitability and evolution of ocean worlds in the Saturn system". American Astronomical Society. 48: 225.01. Bibcode:2016DPS....4822501M. Retrieved 16 September 2017.

General references

The International Journal of Astrobiology Archived 25 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine, published by Cambridge University Press, is the forum for practitioners in this interdisciplinary field.
Astrobiology, published by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., is a peer-reviewed journal that explores the origins of life, evolution, distribution, and destiny in the universe.
Mix, Lucas; Cady, Sherry L. and McKay, Christopher; eds. (2024). The Astrobiology Primer 3.0 is a special issue of the Astrobiology journal compiled by 12 editors and 60 authors that provides an overview of the current state of research in astrobiology.
Chapter 1: The Astrobiology Primer 3.0
Chapter 2: What is Life?
Chapter 3: The Origins and Evolution of Planetary Systems
Chapter 4: A Geological and Chemical Context for the Origins of Life on Early Earth
Chapter 5: Major Biological Innovations in the History of Life on Earth
Chapter 6: The Breadth and Limits of Life on Earth
Chapter 7: Assessing Habitability Beyond Earth
Chapter 8: Searching for Life Beyond Earth
Chapter 9: Life as We Don't Know It
Chapter 10: Planetary Protection - History, Science and the Future
Chapter 11: Astrobiology Education, Engagement and Resources
Catling, David C. (2013). Astrobiology: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-958645-5.
Cockell, Charles S. (2015). Astrobiology: Understanding Life in the Universe. NJ: Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-118-91332-1.
Kolb, Vera M., ed. (2015). Astrobiology: An Evolutionary Approach. Boca Raton: CRC Press. ISBN 978-1-4665-8461-7.
Kolb, Vera M., ed. (2019). Handbook of Astrobiology. Boca Raton: CRC Press. ISBN 978-1-138-06512-3.
Loeb, Avi (2021). Extraterrestrial: The First Sign of Intelligent Life Beyond Earth. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0358278146
Dick, Steven J.; James Strick (2005). The Living Universe: NASA and the Development of Astrobiology. Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-3733-7.
Grinspoon, David (2004) [2003]. Lonely planets. The natural philosophy of alien life. New York: ECCO. ISBN 978-0-06-018540-4.
Mautner, Michael N. (2000). Seeding the Universe with Life: Securing Our Cosmological Future (PDF). Washington D. C.: Legacy Books. ISBN 978-0-476-00330-9.
Jakosky, Bruce M. (2006). Science, Society, and the Search for Life in the Universe. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. ISBN 978-0-8165-2613-0.
Lunine, Jonathan I. (2005). Astrobiology. A Multidisciplinary Approach. San Francisco: Pearson Addison-Wesley. ISBN 978-0-8053-8042-2.
Gilmour, Iain; Mark A. Sephton (2004). An introduction to astrobiology. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83736-1.
Ward, Peter; Brownlee, Donald (2000). Rare Earth: Why Complex Life is Uncommon in the Universe. New York: Copernicus. ISBN 978-0-387-98701-9.
Chyba, C. F.; Hand, K. P. (2005). "ASTROBIOLOGY: The Study of the Living Universe". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics. 43 (1): 31–74. Bibcode:2005ARA&A..43...31C. doi:10.1146/annurev.astro.43.051804.102202. S2CID 2084246.

Mix, Lucas; Cady, Sherry L. and McKay, Christopher; eds. (2024). The Astrobiology Primer 3.0 is a special issue of the Astrobiology journal compiled by 12 editors and 60 authors that provides an overview of the current state of research in astrobiology.
Chapter 1: The Astrobiology Primer 3.0
Chapter 2: What is Life?
Chapter 3: The Origins and Evolution of Planetary Systems
Chapter 4: A Geological and Chemical Context for the Origins of Life on Early Earth
Chapter 5: Major Biological Innovations in the History of Life on Earth
Chapter 6: The Breadth and Limits of Life on Earth
Chapter 7: Assessing Habitability Beyond Earth
Chapter 8: Searching for Life Beyond Earth
Chapter 9: Life as We Don't Know It
Chapter 10: Planetary Protection - History, Science and the Future
Chapter 11: Astrobiology Education, Engagement and Resources

Chapter 1: The Astrobiology Primer 3.0
Chapter 2: What is Life?
Chapter 3: The Origins and Evolution of Planetary Systems
Chapter 4: A Geological and Chemical Context for the Origins of Life on Early Earth
Chapter 5: Major Biological Innovations in the History of Life on Earth
Chapter 6: The Breadth and Limits of Life on Earth
Chapter 7: Assessing Habitability Beyond Earth
Chapter 8: Searching for Life Beyond Earth
Chapter 9: Life as We Don't Know It
Chapter 10: Planetary Protection - History, Science and the Future
Chapter 11: Astrobiology Education, Engagement and Resources

Further reading

Domagal-Goldman, Shawn D.; et al. (2016). Domagal-Dorman, Shawn (ed.). "The Astrobiology Primer v2.0". Astrobiology. 16 (8): 561–653. Bibcode:2016AsBio..16..561D. doi:10.1089/ast.2015.1460. PMC 5008114. PMID 27532777. S2CID 4425585.
D. Goldsmith, T. Owen, The Search For Life in the Universe, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 2001 (3rd edition). ISBN 978-1891389160
Andy Weir's 2021 novel, Project Hail Mary, centers on astrobiology.

External links

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsResources from Wikiversity

Astrobiology.nasa.gov
UK Centre for Astrobiology Archived 20 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine
Spanish Centro de Astrobiología
Astrobiology Research at The Library of Congress
Astrobiology Survey – An introductory course on astrobiology
Summary - Search For Life Beyond Earth Archived 24 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine (NASA; 25 June 2021)

vte

Astrochemistry
Astrophysics
Atmospheric sciences
Biochemistry
Evolutionary biology
Exoplanetology
Geomicrobiology
Microbiology
Paleontology
Planetary oceanography
Planetary science

Abiogenesis
Allan Hills 84001
Biomolecule
Biosignature
Drake equation
Earliest known life forms
Earth analog
Extraterrestrial life
Extraterrestrial sample curation
Extremophiles
Hypothetical types of biochemistry
List of microorganisms tested in outer space
Ocean planet
Panspermia
Planetary protection
Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI)
Yamato meteorite

Circumstellar habitable zone
Earth analog
Extraterrestrial liquid water
Galactic habitable zone
Habitability of binary star systems
Habitability of natural satellites
Habitability of neutron star systems
Habitability of red dwarf systems
Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems
Habitability of yellow dwarf systems
Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems
Habitable zone for complex life
List of potentially habitable exoplanets
Tholin
Superhabitable planet

BIO
BIOCORE
Biolab
Bion
BIOPAN
Biosatellite program
E-MIST
ERA
Eu:CROPIS
EXOSTACK
EXPOSE
Lunar Micro Ecosystem
O/OREOS
OREOcube
Tanpopo
VEGGIE

Beagle 2
Fobos-Grunt
Mars Science Laboratory
Curiosity rover
Mars 2020
Perseverance rover
Phoenix
Tianwen-1
Zhurong rover
Trace Gas Orbiter
Viking

Curiosity rover

Perseverance rover

Zhurong rover

Hayabusa2
OSIRIS-REx
Rosetta

BioSentinel

Dragonfly
Europa Clipper
ExoMars
Rosalind Franklin rover

Rosalind Franklin rover

Breakthrough Enceladus
BRUIE
CAESAR
Enceladus Explorer
Enceladus Life Finder‎
Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability
Enceladus Orbilander
Europa Lander
ExoLance
Explorer of Enceladus and Titan
Icebreaker Life
Journey to Enceladus and Titan
Laplace-P
Life Investigation For Enceladus
Mars sample return mission
Oceanus
THEO
Trident

Astrobiology Field Laboratory
Beagle 3
Biological Oxidant and Life Detection
Kazachok
Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment
Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher
MELOS
Northern Light
Red Dragon
Terrestrial Planet Finder

Astrobiology Society of Britain
Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets
Breakthrough Initiatives
Breakthrough Listen
Breakthrough Message
Breakthrough Starshot
Carl Sagan Institute
Center for Life Detection Science
European Astrobiology Network Association
MERMOZ
NASA Astrobiology Institute
Nexus for Exoplanet System Science
Ocean Worlds Exploration Program
Spanish Astrobiology Center‎

Breakthrough Listen
Breakthrough Message
Breakthrough Starshot

Category
 Commons

vte

Astrobiology
Astrochemistry
Astrometry
Astrophysics
Cosmochemistry
Cosmology
Extragalactic astronomy
Galactic astronomy
Orbital mechanics
Physical cosmology
Planetary geology
Planetary science
Solar astronomy
Stellar astronomy

vte

Outline
History
Timeline
Astronomer
Astronomical symbols
Astronomical object
Glossary
... in space

Timeline

Amateur
Observational
Sidewalk
Space telescope

Galactic / Extragalactic
Local system
Solar

Solar

Radio
Submillimetre
Infrared (Far-infrared)
Visible-light (optical)
Ultraviolet
X-ray
History
Gamma-ray

History

Neutrino
Cosmic rays
Gravitational radiation
High-energy
Radar
Spherical
Multi-messenger

Australian Aboriginal
Babylonian
Chinese
Egyptian
Greek
Hebrew
Indian
Inuit
Maya
Medieval Islamic
Persian
Serbian
folk
Tibetan

folk

List
Category
Extremely large telescope
Extremely Large Telescope
Gran Telescopio Canarias
Hale Telescope
Hubble Space Telescope
Keck Observatory
Large Binocular Telescope
Southern African Large Telescope
Very Large Telescope

Archaeoastronomy
Astrobiology
Astrochemistry
Astroinformatics
Astrophysics
Astrology and astronomy
Astrometry
Astronomers Monument
Astroparticle physics
Binoculars
Constellation
IAU
Cosmogony
Photometry
Planetarium
Planetary geology
Physical cosmology
Quantum cosmology
List of astronomers
French
Medieval Islamic
Russian
Women
Telescope
X-ray telescope
history
lists
Zodiac

IAU

French
Medieval Islamic
Russian
Women

X-ray telescope
history
lists

Category
 Commons

vte

Introduction (Genetics, Evolution)
Outline
History
Timeline
Index

Timeline

Science
Life
Properties (Adaptation,  Energy processing, Growth, Order, Regulation, Reproduction (Self-replication), Response to environment)
Hierarchy of life (Atom > Molecule > Organelle > Cell > Tissue > Organ > Organ system > Organism > Population > Community > Ecosystem > Biosphere)
Reductionistic
 Emergent property
Mechanistic
Scientific method
Taxonomic rank
 Theory
 Law
Peer review
Biology journals
Common name

Atoms
Amino acids
Carbohydrates
Chemical bond
Chemical element
Lipids
Matter
Quantum
Molecules
Monomer
Nucleic acids
Organic compounds
pH
Polymer
Proteins
Water

Quantum

ATP
Cell cycle
Cell theory
Cell signaling
Cellular respiration
Energy transformation
Enzyme
Eukaryote
Fermentation
Metabolism
Meiosis
Mitosis
Photosynthesis
Prokaryote

DNA
Epigenetics
Evolutionary developmental biology
Gene expression
Gene regulation
Genomes
Mendelian inheritance
Post-transcriptional modification

Adaptation
Earliest known life forms
Function
Genetic drift
Gene flow
History of life
Macroevolution
Microevolution
Mutation
Natural selection
Phylogenetics
Speciation
Taxonomy

Archaea
Bacteria
Eukaryote
Alga
Animal
Fungus
Plant
Protist
Virus

Alga
Animal
Fungus
Plant
Protist

Epidermis (botany)
Flower
Ground tissue
Leaf
Phloem
Plant stem
Root
Shoot
Vascular plant
Vascular tissue
Xylem

Breathing
Circulatory system
Endocrine system
Digestive system
Homeostasis
Immune system
Internal environment
Muscular system
Nervous system
Reproductive system
Respiratory system

Biogeochemical cycle
Biological interaction
Biomass
Biomes
Biosphere
Climate
Climate change
Community
Conservation
Ecosystem
Habitat
niche
Microbiome
Population dynamics
Resources

niche

Genetic engineering
Transformation
Gel electrophoresis
Chromatography
Centrifugation
Cell culture
DNA sequencing
DNA microarray
Green fluorescent protein
vector
Enzyme assay
Protein purification
Western blot
Northern blot
Southern blot
Restriction enzyme
Polymerase chain reaction
Two-hybrid screening
in vivo
in vitro
in silico

Belt transect
mark and recapture
species discovery curve

Abiogenesis
Aerobiology
Agronomy
Agrostology
Anatomy
Astrobiology
Bacteriology
Biochemistry
Biogeography
Biogeology
Bioinformatics
Biological engineering
Biomechanics
Biophysics
Biosemiotics
Biostatistics
Biotechnology
Botany
Cell biology
Cellular microbiology
Chemical biology
Chronobiology
Cognitive biology
Computational biology
Conservation biology
Cryobiology
Cytogenetics
Dendrology
Developmental biology
Ecological genetics
Ecology
Embryology
Epidemiology
Epigenetics
Evolutionary biology
Freshwater biology
Generative biology
Genetics
Genomics
Geobiology
Gerontology
Herpetology
Histology
Human biology
Ichthyology
Immunology
Lipidology
Mammalogy
Marine biology
Mathematical biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Neontology
Neuroscience
Nutrition
Ornithology
Osteology
Paleontology
Parasitology
Pathology
Pharmacology
Photobiology
Phycology
Phylogenetics
Physiology
Pomology
Primatology
Proteomics
Protistology
Quantum biology
Relational biology
Reproductive biology
Sociobiology
Structural biology
Synthetic biology
Systematics
Systems biology
Taxonomy
Teratology
Toxicology
Virology
Virophysics
Xenobiology
Zoology

Biology
Botanical terms
Ecological terms
Plant morphology terms

Biology portal
 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject

vte

Abiogenesis
Aerobiology
Agronomy
Agrostology
Anatomy
Astrobiology
Bacteriology
Biochemistry
Biogeography
Biogeology
Bioinformatics
Biological engineering
Biomechanics
Biophysics
Biosemiotics
Biostatistics
Biotechnology
Botany
Cell biology
Cellular microbiology
Chemical biology
Chronobiology
Cognitive biology
Computational biology
Conservation biology
Cryobiology
Cytogenetics
Dendrology
Developmental biology
Ecological genetics
Ecology
Embryology
Epidemiology
Epigenetics
Evolutionary biology
Freshwater biology
Generative biology
Genetics
Genomics
Geobiology
Gerontology
Herpetology
Histology
Human biology
Ichthyology
Immunology
Lipidology
Mammalogy
Marine biology
Mathematical biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Neontology
Neuroscience
Nutrition
Ornithology
Osteology
Paleontology
Parasitology
Pathology
Pharmacology
Photobiology
Phycology
Phylogenetics
Physiology
Pomology
Primatology
Proteomics
Protistology
Quantum biology
Relational biology
Reproductive biology
Sociobiology
Structural biology
Synthetic biology
Systematics
Systems biology
Taxonomy
Teratology
Toxicology
Virology
Virophysics
Xenobiology
Zoology

History of biology
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
Timeline of biology and organic chemistry

vte

Shergotty meteorite (1865)
Nakhla meteorite (1911)
Murchison meteorite (1969)
Viking lander biological experiments (1976)
Allan Hills 77005 (1977)
Allan Hills 84001 (1984)
Yamato 000593 (2000)
CI1 fossils (2011)

CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar)
CTA-102 (misidentified quasar)

KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations)
EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations)
VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations)
HD 164595 signal (unknown origin)

SHGb02+14a (radio source)
Wow! signal (inconclusive)
Fast radio burst (unknown origin)
BLC1 (radio signal)

Earliest known life forms
Planetary habitability in the Solar System
Life on Venus
Life on Mars
Life on Titan

Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems
Circumstellar habitable zone
Earth analog
Extraterrestrial liquid water
Galactic habitable zone
Habitability of binary star systems
Habitability of natural satellites
Habitability of neutron star systems
Habitability of red dwarf systems
Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems
Habitability of yellow dwarf systems
Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems
List of potentially habitable exoplanets
Planetary habitability
Superhabitable planet
Tholin

Beagle 2
Biological Oxidant and Life Detection
BioSentinel
Curiosity rover
Darwin
Dragonfly
Enceladus Explorer
Enceladus Life Finder
Europa Clipper
ExoMars
Rosalind Franklin rover
ExoLance
EXPOSE
Foton-M3
Icebreaker Life
Journey to Enceladus and Titan
Laplace-P
Life Investigation For Enceladus
Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment
Mars Geyser Hopper
Mars sample-return mission
Mars 2020
Northern Light
Opportunity rover
Perseverance rover
SpaceX Red Dragon
Spirit rover
Tanpopo
Titan Mare Explorer
Venus In Situ Explorer
Viking 1
Viking 2

Rosalind Franklin rover

Active SETI
Allen Telescope Array
Arecibo message
Arecibo Observatory
Berkeley SETI Research Center
Bracewell probe
Breakthrough Initiatives
Breakthrough Listen
Breakthrough Message
Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence
Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal
Astrolinguistics
Lincos language
NIROSETI
Pioneer plaque
Project Cyclops
Project Ozma
Project Phoenix
SERENDIP
Search for extraterrestrial intelligence
SETI@home
setiQuest
Voyager Golden Record
Water hole
Xenolinguistics

Breakthrough Listen
Breakthrough Message

Energy beings
Grey aliens
Insectoids
Little green men
Nordic aliens
Reptilian humanoids

Cosmic pluralism
Directed panspermia
Drake equation
Extraterrestrial hypothesis
Fermi paradox
Hypothetical types of biochemistry
Interplanetary contamination
Kardashev scale
Mediocrity principle
Non-planetary abiogenesis
Panspermia

Aestivation hypothesis
Berserker hypothesis
Dark forest hypothesis
Firstborn hypothesis
Great Filter
Hart–Tipler conjecture
Neocatastrophism
Planetarium hypothesis
Rare Earth hypothesis
Zoo hypothesis

Ancient astronauts
Astrobiology
Astroecology
Biosignature
Brookings Report
Exotheology
Extraterrestrials in fiction
Extremophile
Hemolithin
History of the extraterrestrial life debate
MERMOZ
Nexus for Exoplanet System Science
Noogenesis
Planetary protection
Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact
Post-detection policy
San Marino Scale
Technosignature
UFO religion
Xenoarchaeology

vte

The human body
Hygiene
Locomotion
Medicine
Neuroscience
Psychology
Psychological and sociological effects
Sex
Sleep

Psychological and sociological effects

Animals
Cats
Cockroaches
Dogs
Frogs
Fruit flies
Mice
Primates
Tardigrades
Tortoises
Extraterrestrial life
Microorganisms
Plants
Astrobotany

Cats
Cockroaches
Dogs
Frogs
Fruit flies
Mice
Primates
Tardigrades
Tortoises

Astrobotany

Climate
Corrosion
Debris
Dust
Magnetosphere
Weather
Weathering

Weathering

Advertising
Alcohol
Archaeology
of Earth
of items in space
Art
Burial
Colonization
Economy
Mining
Trade
Ethics
Exploration
Food
Law
Military
Music
Religion
Christmas
Selfies
Tourism
Voting
War
Women

of Earth
of items in space

Mining
Trade

Christmas

Accidents
Architecture
Farming
Food
Carbonated drinks
Toilets
Writing

Carbonated drinks

Logistics
Manufacturing
Mining
Power
Batteries
Nuclear
Solar
for Earth
for spacecraft
Radar
Telescopes
Weapons

Batteries
Nuclear
Solar
for Earth
for spacecraft

for Earth
for spacecraft

vte

Active SETI
Breakthrough Initiatives
Breakthrough Listen
Breakthrough Message
Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence
Search for extraterrestrial intelligence

Breakthrough Listen
Breakthrough Message

List of interstellar radio messages
A Message from Earth
Across the Universe
Arecibo message
Bracewell probe
Cosmic Call
CosmicOS
Hello from Earth
Pioneer plaque
Teen Age Message
Voyager Golden Record

Frank Drake
Ann Druyan
Hans Freudenthal
Sebastian von Hoerner
Nikolai Kardashev
Jon Lomberg
Carl Sagan
Linda Salzman Sagan
Iosif Shklovsky
Aleksandr Zaitsev

Alien language
Archaeology, Anthropology, and Interstellar Communication
Astrobiology
Astrolinguistics
Drake equation
Extraterrestrial life
Lincos
Fermi paradox
Prix Guzman
San Marino Scale

Category
 Space Portal

vte

Aluminium monochloride
Aluminium monofluoride
Aluminium(II) oxide
Argonium
Carbon cation
Carbon monophosphide
Carbon monosulfide
Carbon monoxide
Cyano radical
Diatomic carbon
Fluoromethylidynium
Helium hydride ion
Hydrogen chloride
Hydrogen fluoride
Hydrogen (molecular)
Hydroxyl radical
Imidogen
Iron(II) oxide
Magnesium monohydride
Methylidyne radical
Nitric oxide
Nitrogen (molecular)
Oxygen (molecular)
Phosphorus monoxide
Phosphorus mononitride
Potassium chloride
Silicon carbide
Silicon monoxide
Silicon monosulfide
Sodium chloride
Sodium iodide
Sulfanyl
Sulfur mononitride
Sulfur monoxide
Titanium(II) oxide

Aluminium(I) hydroxide
Aluminium isocyanide
Amino radical
Carbon dioxide
Carbonyl sulfide
CCP radical
Chloronium
Diazenylium
Dicarbon monoxide
Disilicon carbide
Ethynyl radical
Formyl radical
Hydrogen cyanide (HCN)
Hydrogen isocyanide (HNC)
Hydrogen sulfide
Hydroperoxyl
Iron cyanide
Isoformyl
Magnesium cyanide
Magnesium isocyanide
Methylene
Methylidynephosphane
N2H+
Nitrous oxide
Nitroxyl
Ozone
Potassium cyanide
Sodium cyanide
Sodium hydroxide
Silicon carbonitride
c-Silicon dicarbide
SiNC
Sulfur dioxide
Thioformyl
Thioxoethenylidene
Titanium dioxide
Tricarbon
Trihydrogen cation
Water

Acetylene
Ammonia
Cyanoethynyl
Formaldehyde
Fulminic acid
HCCN
Hydrogen peroxide
Hydromagnesium isocyanide
Isocyanic acid
Isothiocyanic acid
Ketenyl
Methyl cation
Methyl radical
Methylene amidogen
Propynylidyne
Protonated carbon dioxide
Protonated hydrogen cyanide
Silicon tricarbide
Thiocyanic acid
Thioformaldehyde
Tricarbon monosulfide
Tricarbon monoxide

Ammonium ion
Butadiynyl
Carbodiimide
Cyanamide
Cyanoacetylene
Cyanoformaldehyde
Cyanomethyl
Cyclopropenylidene
Formic acid
Isocyanoacetylene
Ketene
Methane
Methoxy radical
Methylenimine
Propadienylidene
Protonated formaldehyde
Silane
Silicon-carbide cluster

Acetonitrile
Cyanobutadiynyl radical
Cyclopropenone
Diacetylene
E-Cyanomethanimine
Ethylene
Formamide
HC4N
Ketenimine
Methanethiol
Methanol
Methyl isocyanide
Pentynylidyne
Propynal
Protonated cyanoacetylene

Acetaldehyde
Acrylonitrile
Vinyl cyanide
Cyanodiacetylene
Ethylene oxide
Glycolonitrile
Hexatriynyl radical
Methyl isocyanate
Methylamine
Propyne
Vinyl alcohol

Vinyl cyanide

Acetic acid
Acrolein
Aminoacetonitrile
Cyanoallene
Ethanimine
Glycolaldehyde
Hexapentaenylidene
Methyl formate
Methylcyanoacetylene

Acetamide
Cyanohexatriyne
Dimethyl ether
Ethanethiol
Ethanol
Methyldiacetylene
N-Methylformamide
Octatetraynyl radical
Propene
Propionitrile

Acetone
Benzene
Benzonitrile
Buckminsterfullerene (C60, C60+, fullerene, buckyball)
Butyronitrile
C70 fullerene
Cyanodecapentayne
Ethyl formate
Ethylene glycol
Heptatrienyl radical
Methyl acetate
Methyl-cyano-diacetylene
Methyltriacetylene
Propionaldehyde
Pyrimidine

Ammonia
Ammonium ion
Formaldehyde
Formyl radical
Heavy water
Hydrogen cyanide
Hydrogen deuteride
Hydrogen isocyanide
N2D+
Propyne
Trihydrogen cation

Anthracene
Dihydroxyacetone
Glycine
Graphene
H2NCO+
Hemolithin
Linear C5
Methoxyethane
Naphthalene cation
Phosphine
Pyrene
Silylidyne

Abiogenesis
Astrobiology
Astrochemistry
Atomic and molecular astrophysics
Chemical formula
Circumstellar dust
Circumstellar envelope
Cosmic dust
Cosmic ray
Cosmochemistry
Diffuse interstellar band
Earliest known life forms
Extraterrestrial life
Extraterrestrial liquid water
Forbidden mechanism
Homochirality
Intergalactic dust
Interplanetary medium
Interstellar medium
Iron–sulfur world theory
Kerogen
Molecules in stars
Nexus for Exoplanet System Science
Organic compound
Outer space
PAH world hypothesis
Photodissociation region
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)
Pseudo-panspermia
RNA world hypothesis
Spectroscopy
Tholin

Category:Astrochemistry
 Outer space portal
 Astronomy portal
 Chemistry portal

Biology Astronomy Spaceflight Solar System

GermanyUnited StatesJapanCzech RepublicIsrael

Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine2

2

A quantum computer is a computer that exploits quantum mechanical phenomena. On small scales, physical matter exhibits properties of both particles and waves, and quantum computing takes advantage of this behavior using specialized hardware. Classical physics cannot explain the operation of these quantum devices, and a scalable quantum computer could perform some calculations exponentially faster[a] than any modern "classical" computer. Theoretically a large-scale quantum computer could break some widely used encryption schemes and aid physicists in performing physical simulations; however, the current state of the art is largely experimental and impractical, with several obstacles to useful applications.

The basic unit of information in quantum computing, the qubit (or "quantum bit"), serves the same function as the bit in classical computing. However, unlike a classical bit, which can be in one of two states (a binary), a qubit can exist in a superposition of its two "basis" states, a state that is in an abstract sense "between" the two basis states. When measuring a qubit, the result is a probabilistic output of a classical bit. If a quantum computer manipulates the qubit in a particular way, wave interference effects can amplify the desired measurement results. The design of quantum algorithms involves creating procedures that allow a quantum computer to perform calculations efficiently and quickly.

Quantum computers are not yet practical for real-world applications. Physically engineering high-quality qubits has proven to be challenging. If a physical qubit is not sufficiently isolated from its environment, it suffers from quantum decoherence, introducing noise into calculations. National governments have invested heavily in experimental research aimed at developing  scalable qubits with longer coherence times and lower error rates. Example implementations include superconductors (which isolate an electrical current by eliminating electrical resistance) and ion traps (which confine a single atomic particle using electromagnetic fields).

In principle, a classical computer can solve the same computational problems as a quantum computer, given enough time. Quantum advantage comes in the form of time complexity rather than computability, and quantum complexity theory shows that some quantum algorithms are exponentially more efficient than the best-known classical algorithms. A large-scale quantum computer could in theory solve computational problems that are not solvable within a reasonable timeframe for a classical computer. This concept of additional ability has been called "quantum supremacy". While such claims have drawn significant attention to the discipline, near-term practical use cases remain limited.

History

For many years, the fields of quantum mechanics and computer science formed distinct academic communities.[1] Modern quantum theory developed in the 1920s to explain perplexing physical phenomena observed at atomic scales,[2][3] and digital computers emerged in the following decades to replace human computers for tedious calculations.[4] Both disciplines had practical applications during World War II; computers played a major role in wartime cryptography,[5] and quantum physics was essential for nuclear physics used in the Manhattan Project.[6]

As physicists applied quantum mechanical models to computational problems and swapped digital bits for qubits, the fields of quantum mechanics and computer science began to converge. In 1980, Paul Benioff introduced the quantum Turing machine, which uses quantum theory to describe a simplified computer.[7]
When digital computers became faster, physicists faced an exponential increase in overhead when simulating quantum dynamics,[8] prompting Yuri Manin and Richard Feynman to independently suggest that hardware based on quantum phenomena might be more efficient for computer simulation.[9][10][11]
In a 1984 paper, Charles Bennett and Gilles Brassard applied quantum theory to cryptography protocols and demonstrated that quantum key distribution could enhance information security.[12][13]

Quantum algorithms then emerged for solving oracle problems, such as Deutsch's algorithm in 1985,[14] the Bernstein–Vazirani algorithm in 1993,[15] and Simon's algorithm in 1994.[16]
These algorithms did not solve practical problems, but demonstrated mathematically that one could gain more information by querying a black box with a quantum state in superposition, sometimes referred to as quantum parallelism.[17]

Peter Shor built on these results with his 1994 algorithm for breaking the widely used RSA and Diffie–Hellman encryption protocols,[18] which drew significant attention to the field of quantum computing. In 1996, Grover's algorithm established a quantum speedup for the widely applicable unstructured search problem.[19][20] The same year, Seth Lloyd proved that quantum computers could simulate quantum systems without the exponential overhead present in classical simulations,[21] validating Feynman's 1982 conjecture.[22]

Over the years, experimentalists have constructed small-scale quantum computers using trapped ions and superconductors.[23]
In 1998, a two-qubit quantum computer demonstrated the feasibility of the technology,[24][25] and subsequent experiments have increased the number of qubits and reduced error rates.[23]

In 2019, Google AI and NASA announced that they had achieved quantum supremacy with a 54-qubit machine, performing a computation that is impossible for any classical computer.[26][27][28] However, the validity of this claim is still being actively researched.[29][30]

Quantum information processing

Computer engineers typically describe a modern computer's operation in terms of classical electrodynamics.
Within these "classical" computers, some components (such as semiconductors and random number generators) may rely on quantum behavior, but these components are not isolated from their environment, so any quantum information quickly decoheres.
While programmers may depend on probability theory when designing a randomized algorithm, quantum mechanical notions like superposition and interference are largely irrelevant for program analysis.

Quantum programs, in contrast, rely on precise control of coherent quantum systems. Physicists describe these systems mathematically using linear algebra. Complex numbers model probability amplitudes, vectors model quantum states, and matrices model the operations that can be performed on these states. Programming a quantum computer is then a matter of composing operations in such a way that the resulting program computes a useful result in theory and is implementable in practice.

As physicist Charlie Bennett describes the relationship between quantum and classical computers,[31]

A classical computer is a quantum computer ... so we shouldn't be asking about "where do quantum speedups come from?" We should say, "well, all computers are quantum. ... Where do classical slowdowns come from?"

Quantum information

Just as the bit is the basic concept of classical information theory, the qubit is the fundamental unit of quantum information. The same term qubit is used to refer to an abstract mathematical model and to any physical system that is represented by that model. A classical bit, by definition, exists in either of two physical states, which can be denoted 0 and 1. A qubit is also described by a state, and two states often written 




|

0
⟩


{\displaystyle |0\rangle }

 and 




|

1
⟩


{\displaystyle |1\rangle }

 serve as the quantum counterparts of the classical states 0 and 1. However, the quantum states 




|

0
⟩


{\displaystyle |0\rangle }

 and 




|

1
⟩


{\displaystyle |1\rangle }

 belong to a vector space, meaning that they can be multiplied by constants and added together, and the result is again a valid quantum state. Such a combination is known as a superposition of 




|

0
⟩


{\displaystyle |0\rangle }

 and 




|

1
⟩


{\displaystyle |1\rangle }

.[32][33]

A two-dimensional vector mathematically represents a qubit state. Physicists typically use Dirac notation for quantum mechanical linear algebra, writing 




|

ψ
⟩


{\displaystyle |\psi \rangle }

 'ket psi' for a vector labeled 



ψ


{\displaystyle \psi }

 . Because a qubit is a two-state system, any qubit state takes the form 



α

|

0
⟩
+
β

|

1
⟩


{\displaystyle \alpha |0\rangle +\beta |1\rangle }

 , where 




|

0
⟩


{\displaystyle |0\rangle }

 and 




|

1
⟩


{\displaystyle |1\rangle }

 are the standard basis states,[b] and 



α


{\displaystyle \alpha }

 and 



β


{\displaystyle \beta }

 are the probability amplitudes, which are in general complex numbers.[33] If either 



α


{\displaystyle \alpha }

 or 



β


{\displaystyle \beta }

 is zero, the qubit is effectively a classical bit; when both are nonzero, the qubit is in superposition. Such a quantum state vector acts similarly to a (classical) probability vector, with one key difference: unlike probabilities, probability amplitudes are not necessarily positive numbers.[35] Negative amplitudes allow for destructive wave interference.

When a qubit is measured in the standard basis, the result is a classical bit. The Born rule describes the norm-squared correspondence between amplitudes and probabilities—when measuring a qubit 



α

|

0
⟩
+
β

|

1
⟩


{\displaystyle \alpha |0\rangle +\beta |1\rangle }

, the state collapses to 




|

0
⟩


{\displaystyle |0\rangle }

 with probability 




|

α


|


2




{\displaystyle |\alpha |^{2}}

, or to 




|

1
⟩


{\displaystyle |1\rangle }

 with probability 




|

β


|


2




{\displaystyle |\beta |^{2}}

.
Any valid qubit state has coefficients 



α


{\displaystyle \alpha }

 and 



β


{\displaystyle \beta }

 such that 




|

α


|


2


+

|

β


|


2


=
1


{\displaystyle |\alpha |^{2}+|\beta |^{2}=1}

.
As an example, measuring the qubit 



1

/



2



|

0
⟩
+
1

/



2



|

1
⟩


{\displaystyle 1/{\sqrt {2}}|0\rangle +1/{\sqrt {2}}|1\rangle }

 would produce either 




|

0
⟩


{\displaystyle |0\rangle }

 or 




|

1
⟩


{\displaystyle |1\rangle }

 with equal probability.

Each additional qubit doubles the dimension of the state space.[34]
As an example, the vector ⁠1/√2⁠|00⟩ + ⁠1/√2⁠|01⟩ represents a two-qubit state, a tensor product of the qubit |0⟩ with the qubit ⁠1/√2⁠|0⟩ + ⁠1/√2⁠|1⟩.
This vector inhabits a four-dimensional vector space spanned by the basis vectors |00⟩, |01⟩, |10⟩, and |11⟩.
The Bell state ⁠1/√2⁠|00⟩ + ⁠1/√2⁠|11⟩ is impossible to decompose into the tensor product of two individual qubits—the two qubits are entangled because neither qubit has a state vector of its own.
In general, the vector space for an n-qubit system is 2n-dimensional, and this makes it challenging for a classical computer to simulate a quantum one: representing a 100-qubit system requires storing 2100 classical values.

Unitary operators

The state of this one-qubit quantum memory can be manipulated by applying quantum logic gates, analogous to how classical memory can be manipulated with classical logic gates. One important gate for both classical and quantum computation is the NOT gate, which can be represented by a matrix




X
:=


(



0


1




1


0



)


.


{\displaystyle X:={\begin{pmatrix}0&1\\1&0\end{pmatrix}}.}


Mathematically, the application of such a logic gate to a quantum state vector is modelled with matrix multiplication. Thus

The mathematics of single qubit gates can be extended to operate on multi-qubit quantum memories in two important ways. One way is simply to select a qubit and apply that gate to the target qubit while leaving the remainder of the memory unaffected. Another way is to apply the gate to its target only if another part of the memory is in a desired state. These two choices can be illustrated using another example. The possible states of a two-qubit quantum memory are





|

00
⟩
:=


(



1




0




0




0



)


;


|

01
⟩
:=


(



0




1




0




0



)


;


|

10
⟩
:=


(



0




0




1




0



)


;


|

11
⟩
:=


(



0




0




0




1



)


.


{\displaystyle |00\rangle :={\begin{pmatrix}1\\0\\0\\0\end{pmatrix}};\quad |01\rangle :={\begin{pmatrix}0\\1\\0\\0\end{pmatrix}};\quad |10\rangle :={\begin{pmatrix}0\\0\\1\\0\end{pmatrix}};\quad |11\rangle :={\begin{pmatrix}0\\0\\0\\1\end{pmatrix}}.}


The controlled NOT (CNOT) gate can then be represented using the following matrix:




CNOT
:=


(



1


0


0


0




0


1


0


0




0


0


0


1




0


0


1


0



)


.


{\displaystyle \operatorname {CNOT} :={\begin{pmatrix}1&0&0&0\\0&1&0&0\\0&0&0&1\\0&0&1&0\end{pmatrix}}.}


As a mathematical consequence of this definition, 



CNOT
⁡

|

00
⟩
=

|

00
⟩


{\textstyle \operatorname {CNOT} |00\rangle =|00\rangle }

, 



CNOT
⁡

|

01
⟩
=

|

01
⟩


{\textstyle \operatorname {CNOT} |01\rangle =|01\rangle }

, 



CNOT
⁡

|

10
⟩
=

|

11
⟩


{\textstyle \operatorname {CNOT} |10\rangle =|11\rangle }

, and 



CNOT
⁡

|

11
⟩
=

|

10
⟩


{\textstyle \operatorname {CNOT} |11\rangle =|10\rangle }

. In other words, the CNOT applies a NOT gate (



X


{\textstyle X}

 from before) to the second qubit if and only if the first qubit is in the state 




|

1
⟩


{\textstyle |1\rangle }

. If the first qubit is 




|

0
⟩


{\textstyle |0\rangle }

, nothing is done to either qubit.

In summary, quantum computation can be described as a network of quantum logic gates and measurements. However, any measurement can be deferred to the end of quantum computation, though this deferment may come at a computational cost, so most quantum circuits depict a network consisting only of quantum logic gates and no measurements.

Quantum parallelism

Quantum parallelism is the heuristic that quantum computers can be thought of as evaluating a function for multiple input values simultaneously. This can be achieved by preparing a quantum system in a superposition of input states and applying a unitary transformation that encodes the function to be evaluated. The resulting state encodes the function's output values for all input values in the superposition, allowing for the computation of multiple outputs simultaneously. This property is key to the speedup of many quantum algorithms. However, "parallelism" in this sense is insufficient to speed up a computation, because the measurement at the end of the computation gives only one value. To be useful, a quantum algorithm must also incorporate some other conceptual ingredient.[36][37]

Quantum programming

There are a number of models of computation for quantum computing, distinguished by the basic elements in which the computation is decomposed.

A quantum gate array decomposes computation into a sequence of few-qubit quantum gates. A quantum computation can be described as a network of quantum logic gates and measurements. However, any measurement can be deferred to the end of quantum computation, though this deferment may come at a computational cost, so most quantum circuits depict a network consisting only of quantum logic gates and no measurements.

Any quantum computation (which is, in the above formalism, any unitary matrix of size 




2

n


×

2

n




{\displaystyle 2^{n}\times 2^{n}}

 over 



n


{\displaystyle n}

 qubits) can be represented as a network of quantum logic gates from a fairly small family of gates. A choice of gate family that enables this construction is known as a universal gate set, since a computer that can run such circuits is a universal quantum computer. One common such set includes all single-qubit gates as well as the CNOT gate from above. This means any quantum computation can be performed by executing a sequence of single-qubit gates together with CNOT gates. Though this gate set is infinite, it can be replaced with a finite gate set by appealing to the Solovay-Kitaev theorem. Implementation of Boolean functions using the few-qubit quantum gates is presented here.[38]

A measurement-based quantum computer decomposes computation into a sequence of Bell state measurements and single-qubit quantum gates applied to a highly entangled initial state (a cluster state), using a technique called quantum gate teleportation.

An adiabatic quantum computer, based on quantum annealing, decomposes computation into a slow continuous transformation of an initial Hamiltonian into a final Hamiltonian, whose ground states contain the solution.[39]

Neuromorphic quantum computing (abbreviated as 'n.quantum computing') is an unconventional type of computing that uses neuromorphic computing to perform quantum operations. It was suggested that quantum algorithms, which are algorithms that run on a realistic model of quantum computation, can be computed equally efficiently with neuromorphic quantum computing. Both, traditional quantum computing and neuromorphic quantum computing are physics-based unconventional computing approaches to computations and do not follow the von Neumann architecture. They both construct a system (a circuit) that represents the physical problem at hand and then leverage their respective physics properties of the system to seek the "minimum". Neuromorphic quantum computing and quantum computing share similar physical properties during computation.

A topological quantum computer decomposes computation into the braiding of anyons in a 2D lattice.[40]

A quantum Turing machine is the quantum analog of a Turing machine.[7] All of these models of computation—quantum circuits,[41] one-way quantum computation,[42] adiabatic quantum computation,[43] and topological quantum computation[44]—have been shown to be equivalent to the quantum Turing machine; given a perfect implementation of one such quantum computer, it can simulate all the others with no more than polynomial overhead. This equivalence need not hold for practical quantum computers, since the overhead of simulation may be too large to be practical.

The threshold theorem shows how increasing the number of qubits can mitigate errors,[45] yet fully fault-tolerant quantum computing remains "a rather distant dream".[46] According to some researchers, noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) machines may have specialized uses in the near future, but noise in quantum gates limits their reliability.[46]
Scientists at Harvard University successfully created "quantum circuits" that correct errors more efficiently than alternative methods, which may potentially remove a major obstacle to practical quantum computers.[47][48] The Harvard research team was supported by MIT, QuEra Computing, Caltech, and Princeton University and funded by DARPA's Optimization with Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum devices (ONISQ) program.[49][50]

Quantum cryptography and cybersecurity

Quantum computing has significant potential applications in the fields of cryptography and cybersecurity. Quantum cryptography, which leverages the principles of quantum mechanics, offers the possibility of secure communication channels that are fundamentally resistant to eavesdropping. Quantum key distribution (QKD) protocols, such as BB84, enable the secure exchange of cryptographic keys between parties, ensuring the confidentiality and integrity of communication. Additionally, quantum random number generators (QRNGs) can produce high-quality randomness, which is essential for secure encryption.

At the same time, quantum computing poses substantial challenges to traditional cryptographic systems. Shor's algorithm, a quantum algorithm for integer factorization, could potentially break widely used public-key encryption schemes like RSA, which rely on the intractability of factoring large numbers. This has prompted a global effort to develop post-quantum cryptography—algorithms designed to resist both classical and quantum attacks. This field remains an active area of research and standardization, aiming to future-proof critical infrastructure against quantum-enabled threats.

Ongoing research in quantum and post-quantum cryptography will be critical for maintaining the integrity of digital infrastructure. Advances such as new QKD protocols, improved QRNGs, and the international standardization of quantum-resistant algorithms will play a key role in ensuring the security of communication and data in the emerging quantum era.[51]

Quantum computing also presents broader systemic and geopolitical risks. These include the potential to break current encryption protocols, disrupt financial systems, and accelerate the development of dual-use technologies such as advanced military systems or engineered pathogens. As a result, nations and corporations are actively investing in post-quantum safeguards, and the race for quantum supremacy is increasingly shaping global power dynamics.[52]

⸻

Communication

Quantum cryptography enables new ways to transmit data securely; for example, quantum key distribution uses entangled quantum states to establish secure cryptographic keys.[53] When a sender and receiver exchange quantum states, they can guarantee that an adversary does not intercept the message, as any unauthorized eavesdropper would disturb the delicate quantum system and introduce a detectable change.[54] With appropriate cryptographic protocols, the sender and receiver can thus establish shared private information resistant to eavesdropping.[12][55]

Modern fiber-optic cables can transmit quantum information over relatively short distances. Ongoing experimental research aims to develop more reliable hardware (such as quantum repeaters), hoping to scale this technology to long-distance quantum networks with end-to-end entanglement. Theoretically, this could enable novel technological applications, such as distributed quantum computing and enhanced quantum sensing.[56][57]

Algorithms

Progress in finding quantum algorithms typically focuses on this quantum circuit model, though exceptions like the quantum adiabatic algorithm exist. Quantum algorithms can be roughly categorized by the type of speedup achieved over corresponding classical algorithms.[58]

Quantum algorithms that offer more than a polynomial speedup over the best-known classical algorithm include Shor's algorithm for factoring and the related quantum algorithms for computing discrete logarithms, solving Pell's equation, and more generally solving the hidden subgroup problem for abelian finite groups.[58] These algorithms depend on the primitive of the quantum Fourier transform. No mathematical proof has been found that shows that an equally fast classical algorithm cannot be discovered, but evidence suggests that this is unlikely.[59] Certain oracle problems like Simon's problem and the Bernstein–Vazirani problem do give provable speedups, though this is in the quantum query model, which is a restricted model where lower bounds are much easier to prove and doesn't necessarily translate to speedups for practical problems.

Other problems, including the simulation of quantum physical processes from chemistry and solid-state physics, the approximation of certain Jones polynomials, and the quantum algorithm for linear systems of equations, have quantum algorithms appearing to give super-polynomial speedups and are BQP-complete. Because these problems are BQP-complete, an equally fast classical algorithm for them would imply that no quantum algorithm gives a super-polynomial speedup, which is believed to be unlikely.[60]

Some quantum algorithms, like Grover's algorithm and amplitude amplification, give polynomial speedups over corresponding classical algorithms.[58] Though these algorithms give comparably modest quadratic speedup, they are widely applicable and thus give speedups for a wide range of problems.[20]

Simulation of quantum systems

Since chemistry and nanotechnology rely on understanding quantum systems, and such systems are impossible to simulate in an efficient manner classically, quantum simulation may be an important application of quantum computing.[61] Quantum simulation could also be used to simulate the behavior of atoms and particles at unusual conditions such as the reactions inside a collider.[62] In June 2023, IBM computer scientists reported that a quantum computer produced better results for a physics problem than a conventional supercomputer.[63][64]

About 2% of the annual global energy output is used for nitrogen fixation to produce ammonia for the Haber process in the agricultural fertilizer industry (even though naturally occurring organisms also produce ammonia). Quantum simulations might be used to understand this process and increase the energy efficiency of production.[65] It is expected that an early use of quantum computing will be modeling that improves the efficiency of the Haber–Bosch process[66] by the mid-2020s[67] although some have predicted it will take longer.[68]

Post-quantum cryptography

A notable application of quantum computation is for attacks on cryptographic systems that are currently in use. Integer factorization, which underpins the security of public key cryptographic systems, is believed to be computationally infeasible with an ordinary computer for large integers if they are the product of few prime numbers (e.g., products of two 300-digit primes).[69] By comparison, a quantum computer could solve this problem exponentially faster using Shor's algorithm to find its factors.[70] This ability would allow a quantum computer to break many of the cryptographic systems in use today, in the sense that there would be a polynomial time (in the number of digits of the integer) algorithm for solving the problem. In particular, most of the popular public key ciphers are based on the difficulty of factoring integers or the discrete logarithm problem, both of which can be solved by Shor's algorithm. In particular, the RSA, Diffie–Hellman, and elliptic curve Diffie–Hellman algorithms could be broken. These are used to protect secure Web pages, encrypted email, and many other types of data. Breaking these would have significant ramifications for electronic privacy and security.

Identifying cryptographic systems that may be secure against quantum algorithms is an actively researched topic under the field of post-quantum cryptography.[71][72] Some public-key algorithms are based on problems other than the integer factorization and discrete logarithm problems to which Shor's algorithm applies, like the McEliece cryptosystem based on a problem in coding theory.[71][73] Lattice-based cryptosystems are also not known to be broken by quantum computers, and finding a polynomial time algorithm for solving the dihedral hidden subgroup problem, which would break many lattice based cryptosystems, is a well-studied open problem.[74] It has been proven that applying Grover's algorithm to break a symmetric (secret key) algorithm by brute force requires time equal to roughly 2n/2 invocations of the underlying cryptographic algorithm, compared with roughly 2n in the classical case,[75] meaning that symmetric key lengths are effectively halved: AES-256 would have the same security against an attack using Grover's algorithm that AES-128 has against classical brute-force search (see Key size).

Search problems

The most well-known example of a problem that allows for a polynomial quantum speedup is unstructured search, which involves finding a marked item out of a list of 



n


{\displaystyle n}

 items in a database. This can be solved by Grover's algorithm using 



O
(


n


)


{\displaystyle O({\sqrt {n}})}

 queries to the database, quadratically fewer than the 



Ω
(
n
)


{\displaystyle \Omega (n)}

 queries required for classical algorithms. In this case, the advantage is not only provable but also optimal: it has been shown that Grover's algorithm gives the maximal possible probability of finding the desired element for any number of oracle lookups. Many examples of provable quantum speedups for query problems are based on Grover's algorithm, including Brassard, Høyer, and Tapp's algorithm for finding collisions in two-to-one functions,[76] and Farhi, Goldstone, and Gutmann's algorithm for evaluating NAND trees.[77]

Problems that can be efficiently addressed with Grover's algorithm have the following properties:[78][79]

There is no searchable structure in the collection of possible answers,
The number of possible answers to check is the same as the number of inputs to the algorithm, and
There exists a Boolean function that evaluates each input and determines whether it is the correct answer.

For problems with all these properties, the running time of Grover's algorithm on a quantum computer scales as the square root of the number of inputs (or elements in the database), as opposed to the linear scaling of classical algorithms. A general class of problems to which Grover's algorithm can be applied[80] is a Boolean satisfiability problem, where the database through which the algorithm iterates is that of all possible answers. An example and possible application of this is a password cracker that attempts to guess a password. Breaking symmetric ciphers with this algorithm is of interest to government agencies.[81]

Quantum annealing

Quantum annealing relies on the adiabatic theorem to undertake calculations. A system is placed in the ground state for a simple Hamiltonian, which slowly evolves to a more complicated Hamiltonian whose ground state represents the solution to the problem in question. The adiabatic theorem states that if the evolution is slow enough the system will stay in its ground state at all times through the process. Adiabatic optimization may be helpful for solving computational biology problems.[82]

Machine learning

Since quantum computers can produce outputs that classical computers cannot produce efficiently, and since quantum computation is fundamentally linear algebraic, some express hope in developing quantum algorithms that can speed up machine learning tasks.[46][83]

For example, the HHL Algorithm, named after its discoverers Harrow, Hassidim, and Lloyd, is believed to provide speedup over classical counterparts.[46][84] Some research groups have recently explored the use of quantum annealing hardware for training Boltzmann machines and deep neural networks.[85][86][87]

Deep generative chemistry models emerge as powerful tools to expedite drug discovery. However, the immense size and complexity of the structural space of all possible drug-like molecules pose significant obstacles, which could be overcome in the future by quantum computers. Quantum computers are naturally good for solving complex quantum many-body problems[21] and thus may be instrumental in applications involving quantum chemistry. Therefore, one can expect that quantum-enhanced generative models[88] including quantum GANs[89] may eventually be developed into ultimate generative chemistry algorithms.

Engineering

As of 2023,[update] classical computers outperform quantum computers for all real-world applications. While current quantum computers may speed up solutions to particular mathematical problems, they give no computational advantage for practical tasks. Scientists and engineers are exploring multiple technologies for quantum computing hardware and hope to develop scalable quantum architectures, but serious obstacles remain.[90][91]

Challenges

There are a number of technical challenges in building a large-scale quantum computer.[92] Physicist David DiVincenzo has listed these requirements for a practical quantum computer:[93]

Physically scalable to increase the number of qubits
Qubits that can be initialized to arbitrary values
Quantum gates that are faster than decoherence time
Universal gate set
Qubits that can be read easily.

Sourcing parts for quantum computers is also very difficult. Superconducting quantum computers, like those constructed by Google and IBM, need helium-3, a nuclear research byproduct, and special superconducting cables made only by the Japanese company Coax Co.[94]

The control of multi-qubit systems requires the generation and coordination of a large number of electrical signals with tight and deterministic timing resolution. This has led to the development of quantum controllers that enable interfacing with the qubits. Scaling these systems to support a growing number of qubits is an additional challenge.[95]

One of the greatest challenges involved in constructing quantum computers is controlling or removing quantum decoherence. This usually means isolating the system from its environment as interactions with the external world cause the system to decohere. However, other sources of decoherence also exist. Examples include the quantum gates and the lattice vibrations and background thermonuclear spin of the physical system used to implement the qubits. Decoherence is irreversible, as it is effectively non-unitary, and is usually something that should be highly controlled, if not avoided. Decoherence times for candidate systems in particular, the transverse relaxation time T2 (for NMR and MRI technology, also called the dephasing time), typically range between nanoseconds and seconds at low temperatures.[96] Currently, some quantum computers require their qubits to be cooled to 20 millikelvin (usually using a dilution refrigerator[97]) in order to prevent significant decoherence.[98] A 2020 study argues that ionizing radiation such as cosmic rays can nevertheless cause certain systems to decohere within milliseconds.[99]

As a result, time-consuming tasks may render some quantum algorithms inoperable, as attempting to maintain the state of qubits for a long enough duration will eventually corrupt the superpositions.[100]

These issues are more difficult for optical approaches as the timescales are orders of magnitude shorter and an often-cited approach to overcoming them is optical pulse shaping. Error rates are typically proportional to the ratio of operating time to decoherence time; hence any operation must be completed much more quickly than the decoherence time.

As described by the threshold theorem, if the error rate is small enough, it is thought to be possible to use quantum error correction to suppress errors and decoherence. This allows the total calculation time to be longer than the decoherence time if the error correction scheme can correct errors faster than decoherence introduces them. An often-cited figure for the required error rate in each gate for fault-tolerant computation is 10−3, assuming the noise is depolarizing.

Meeting this scalability condition is possible for a wide range of systems. However, the use of error correction brings with it the cost of a greatly increased number of required qubits. The number required to factor integers using Shor's algorithm is still polynomial, and thought to be between L and L2, where L is the number of binary digits in the number to be factored; error correction algorithms would inflate this figure by an additional factor of L. For a 1000-bit number, this implies a need for about 104 bits without error correction.[101] With error correction, the figure would rise to about 107 bits. Computation time is about L2 or about 107 steps and at 1 MHz, about 10 seconds. However, the encoding and error-correction overheads increase the size of a real fault-tolerant quantum computer by several orders of magnitude. Careful estimates[102][103] show that at least 3 million physical qubits would factor 2,048-bit integer in 5 months on a fully error-corrected trapped-ion quantum computer. In terms of the number of physical qubits, to date, this remains the lowest estimate[104] for practically useful integer factorization problem sizing 1,024-bit or larger.

Another approach to the stability-decoherence problem is to create a topological quantum computer with anyons, quasi-particles used as threads, and relying on braid theory to form stable logic gates.[105][106]

Quantum supremacy

Physicist John Preskill coined the term quantum supremacy to describe the engineering feat of demonstrating that a programmable quantum device can solve a problem beyond the capabilities of state-of-the-art classical computers.[107][108][109] The problem need not be useful, so some view the quantum supremacy test only as a potential future benchmark.[110]

In October 2019, Google AI Quantum, with the help of NASA, became the first to claim to have achieved quantum supremacy by performing calculations on the Sycamore quantum computer more than 3,000,000 times faster than they could be done on Summit, generally considered the world's fastest computer.[27][111][112] This claim has been subsequently challenged: IBM has stated that Summit can perform samples much faster than claimed,[113][114] and researchers have since developed better algorithms for the sampling problem used to claim quantum supremacy, giving substantial reductions to the gap between Sycamore and classical supercomputers[115][116][117] and even beating it.[118][119][120]

In December 2020, a group at USTC implemented a type of Boson sampling on 76 photons with a photonic quantum computer, Jiuzhang, to demonstrate quantum supremacy.[121][122][123] The authors claim that a classical contemporary supercomputer would require a computational time of 600 million years to generate the number of samples their quantum processor can generate in 20 seconds.[124]

Claims of quantum supremacy have generated hype around quantum computing,[125] but they are based on contrived benchmark tasks that do not directly imply useful real-world applications.[90][126]

In January 2024, a study published in Physical Review Letters provided direct verification of quantum supremacy experiments by computing exact amplitudes for experimentally generated bitstrings using a new-generation Sunway supercomputer, demonstrating a significant leap in simulation capability built on a multiple-amplitude tensor network contraction algorithm. This development underscores the evolving landscape of quantum computing, highlighting both the progress and the complexities involved in validating quantum supremacy claims.[127]

Skepticism

Despite high hopes for quantum computing, significant progress in hardware, and optimism about future applications, a 2023 Nature spotlight article summarized current quantum computers as being "For now, [good for] absolutely nothing".[90] The article elaborated that quantum computers are yet to be more useful or efficient than conventional computers in any case, though it also argued that in the long term such computers are likely to be useful. A 2023 Communications of the ACM article[91] found that current quantum computing algorithms are "insufficient for practical quantum advantage without significant improvements across the software/hardware stack". It argues that the most promising candidates for achieving speedup with quantum computers are "small-data problems", for example in chemistry and materials science. However, the article also concludes that a large range of the potential applications it considered, such as machine learning, "will not achieve quantum advantage with current quantum algorithms in the foreseeable future", and it identified I/O constraints that make speedup unlikely for "big data problems, unstructured linear systems, and database search based on Grover's algorithm".

This state of affairs can be traced to several current and long-term considerations.

Conventional computer hardware and algorithms are not only optimized for practical tasks, but are still improving rapidly, particularly GPU accelerators.
Current quantum computing hardware generates only a limited amount of entanglement before getting overwhelmed by noise.
Quantum algorithms provide speedup over conventional algorithms only for some tasks, and matching these tasks with practical applications proved challenging. Some promising tasks and applications require resources far beyond those available today.[128][129] In particular, processing large amounts of non-quantum data is a challenge for quantum computers.[91]
Some promising algorithms have been "dequantized", i.e., their non-quantum analogues with similar complexity have been found.
If quantum error correction is used to scale quantum computers to practical applications, its overhead may undermine speedup offered by many quantum algorithms.[91]
Complexity analysis of algorithms sometimes makes abstract assumptions that do not hold in applications. For example, input data may not already be available encoded in quantum states, and "oracle functions" used in Grover's algorithm often have internal structure that can be exploited for faster algorithms.

In particular, building computers with large numbers of qubits may be futile if those qubits are not connected well enough and cannot maintain sufficiently high degree of entanglement for a long time. When trying to outperform conventional computers, quantum computing researchers often look for new tasks that can be solved on quantum computers, but this leaves the possibility that efficient non-quantum techniques will be developed in response, as seen for Quantum supremacy demonstrations. Therefore, it is desirable to prove lower bounds on the complexity of best possible non-quantum algorithms (which may be unknown) and show that some quantum algorithms asymptomatically improve upon those bounds.

Some researchers have expressed skepticism that scalable quantum computers could ever be built, typically because of the issue of maintaining coherence at large scales, but also for other reasons.

Bill Unruh doubted the practicality of quantum computers in a paper published in 1994.[130] Paul Davies argued that a 400-qubit computer would even come into conflict with the cosmological information bound implied by the holographic principle.[131] Skeptics like Gil Kalai doubt that quantum supremacy will ever be achieved.[132][133][134] Physicist Mikhail Dyakonov has expressed skepticism of quantum computing as follows:

Physical realizations

A practical quantum computer must use a physical system as a programmable quantum register.[137] Researchers are exploring several technologies as candidates for reliable qubit implementations.[138] Superconductors and trapped ions are some of the most developed proposals, but experimentalists are considering other hardware possibilities as well.[139] 
For example, topological quantum computer approaches are being explored for more fault-tolerance computing systems.[140]

The first quantum logic gates were implemented with trapped ions and prototype general purpose machines with up to 20 qubits have been realized. However, the technology behind these devices combines complex vacuum equipment, lasers, microwave and radio frequency equipment making full scale processors difficult to integrate with standard computing equipment. Moreover, the trapped ion system itself has engineering challenges to overcome.[141]

The largest commercial systems are based on superconductor devices and have scaled to 2000 qubits. However, the error rates for larger machines have been on the order of 5%. Technologically these devices are all cryogenic and scaling to large numbers of qubits requires wafer-scale integration, a serious engineering challenge by itself.[142]

Potential applications

With focus on business management's point of view, the potential applications of quantum computing into four major categories are cybersecurity, data analytics and artificial intelligence, optimization and simulation, and data management and searching.[143]

Theory

Computability

Any computational problem solvable by a classical computer is also solvable by a quantum computer.[144] Intuitively, this is because it is believed that all physical phenomena, including the operation of classical computers, can be described using quantum mechanics, which underlies the operation of quantum computers.

Conversely, any problem solvable by a quantum computer is also solvable by a classical computer. It is possible to simulate both quantum and classical computers manually with just some paper and a pen, if given enough time. More formally, any quantum computer can be simulated by a Turing machine. In other words, quantum computers provide no additional power over classical computers in terms of computability. This means that quantum computers cannot solve undecidable problems like the halting problem, and the existence of quantum computers does not disprove the Church–Turing thesis.[145]

Complexity

While quantum computers cannot solve any problems that classical computers cannot already solve, it is suspected that they can solve certain problems faster than classical computers. For instance, it is known that quantum computers can efficiently factor integers, while this is not believed to be the case for classical computers.

The class of problems that can be efficiently solved by a quantum computer with bounded error is called BQP, for "bounded error, quantum, polynomial time". More formally, BQP is the class of problems that can be solved by a polynomial-time quantum Turing machine with an error probability of at most 1/3. As a class of probabilistic problems, BQP is the quantum counterpart to BPP ("bounded error, probabilistic, polynomial time"), the class of problems that can be solved by polynomial-time probabilistic Turing machines with bounded error.[146] It is known that 





B
P
P
⊆
B
Q
P




{\displaystyle {\mathsf {BPP\subseteq BQP}}}

 and is widely suspected that 





B
Q
P
⊊
B
P
P




{\displaystyle {\mathsf {BQP\subsetneq BPP}}}

, which intuitively would mean that quantum computers are more powerful than classical computers in terms of time complexity.[147]

The exact relationship of BQP to P, NP, and PSPACE is not known. However, it is known that 





P
⊆
B
Q
P
⊆
P
S
P
A
C
E




{\displaystyle {\mathsf {P\subseteq BQP\subseteq PSPACE}}}

; that is, all problems that can be efficiently solved by a deterministic classical computer can also be efficiently solved by a quantum computer, and all problems that can be efficiently solved by a quantum computer can also be solved by a deterministic classical computer with polynomial space resources. It is further suspected that BQP is a strict superset of P, meaning there are problems that are efficiently solvable by quantum computers that are not efficiently solvable by deterministic classical computers. For instance, integer factorization and the discrete logarithm problem are known to be in BQP and are suspected to be outside of P. On the relationship of BQP to NP, little is known beyond the fact that some NP problems that are believed not to be in P are also in BQP (integer factorization and the discrete logarithm problem are both in NP, for example). It is suspected that 





N
P
⊈
B
Q
P




{\displaystyle {\mathsf {NP\nsubseteq BQP}}}

; that is, it is believed that there are efficiently checkable problems that are not efficiently solvable by a quantum computer. As a direct consequence of this belief, it is also suspected that BQP is disjoint from the class of NP-complete problems (if an NP-complete problem were in BQP, then it would follow from NP-hardness that all problems in NP are in BQP).[148]

See also

D-Wave Systems – Canadian quantum computing company
Electronic quantum holography – Information storage technology
Glossary of quantum computing
IARPA – American government agencyPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
India's quantum computer – Indian proposed quantum computer
IonQ – US information technology company
IQM
List of emerging technologies – New technologies actively in development
List of quantum processors
Magic state distillation – Quantum computing algorithm
Metacomputing – Computing for the purpose of computing
Natural computing – Academic field
Optical computing – Computer that uses photons or light waves
Quantum bus – device which can be used to store or transfer information between independent qubits in a quantum computerPages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback
Quantum cognition – Application of quantum theory mathematics to cognitive phenomena
Quantum sensor – Device measuring quantum mechanical effects
Quantum volume – Metric for a quantum computer's capabilities
Quantum weirdness – Unintuitive aspects of quantum mechanics
Rigetti Computing – American quantum computing company
Supercomputer – Type of extremely powerful computer
Theoretical computer science – Subfield of computer science and mathematics
Unconventional computing – Computing by new or unusual methods
Valleytronics – Experimental area in semiconductors

Notes

^ As used in this article, "exponentially faster" has a precise complexity theoretical meaning. Usually, it means that as a function of input size in bits, the best known classical algorithm for a problem requires an exponentially growing number of steps, while a quantum algorithm uses only a polynomial number of steps.

^ The standard basis is also the computational basis.[34]

References

^ Aaronson 2013, p. 132.

^ Zwiebach, Barton (2022). Mastering Quantum Mechanics: Essentials, Theory, and Applications. MIT Press. §1. ISBN 978-0-262-04613-8. Quantum physics has replaced classical physics as the correct fundamental description of our physical universe. It is used routinely to describe most phenomena that occur at short distances. [...] The era of quantum physics began in earnest in 1925 with the discoveries of Erwin Schrödinger and Werner Heisenberg. The seeds for these discoveries were planted by Max Planck, Albert Einstein, Niels Bohr, Louis de Broglie, and others.

^ Weinberg, Steven (2015). "Historical Introduction". Lectures on Quantum Mechanics (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–30. ISBN 978-1-107-11166-0.

^ Ceruzzi, Paul E. (2012). Computing: A Concise History. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. pp. 3, 46. ISBN 978-0-262-31038-3. OCLC 796812982.

^ Hodges, Andrew (2014). Alan Turing: The Enigma. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. p. xviii. ISBN 9780691164724.

^ Mårtensson-Pendrill, Ann-Marie (1 November 2006). "The Manhattan project—a part of physics history". Physics Education. 41 (6): 493–501. Bibcode:2006PhyEd..41..493M. doi:10.1088/0031-9120/41/6/001. ISSN 0031-9120. S2CID 120294023.

^ a b Benioff, Paul (1980). "The computer as a physical system: A microscopic quantum mechanical Hamiltonian model of computers as represented by Turing machines". Journal of Statistical Physics. 22 (5): 563–591. Bibcode:1980JSP....22..563B. doi:10.1007/bf01011339. S2CID 122949592.

^ Buluta, Iulia; Nori, Franco (2 October 2009). "Quantum Simulators". Science. 326 (5949): 108–111. Bibcode:2009Sci...326..108B. doi:10.1126/science.1177838. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 19797653. S2CID 17187000.

^ Manin, Yu. I. (1980). Vychislimoe i nevychislimoe [Computable and Noncomputable] (in Russian). Soviet Radio. pp. 13–15. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 4 March 2013.

^ Feynman, Richard (June 1982). "Simulating Physics with Computers" (PDF). International Journal of Theoretical Physics. 21 (6/7): 467–488. Bibcode:1982IJTP...21..467F. doi:10.1007/BF02650179. S2CID 124545445. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 January 2019. Retrieved 28 February 2019.

^ Nielsen & Chuang 2010, p. 214.

^ a b Bennett, Charles H.; Brassard, Gilles (December 1984). Quantum cryptography: Public key distribution and coin tossing. IEEE International Conference on Computers, Systems & Signal Processing. Bangalore, India. pp. 175–179. arXiv:2003.06557. doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2014.05.025.

^ Brassard, G. (2005). "Brief history of quantum cryptography: A personal perspective". IEEE Information Theory Workshop on Theory and Practice in Information-Theoretic Security, 2005. Awaji Island, Japan: IEEE. pp. 19–23. arXiv:quant-ph/0604072. doi:10.1109/ITWTPI.2005.1543949. ISBN 978-0-7803-9491-9. S2CID 16118245.

^ Deutsch, D. (8 July 1985). "Quantum theory, the Church–Turing principle and the universal quantum computer". Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences. 400 (1818): 97–117. Bibcode:1985RSPSA.400...97D. doi:10.1098/rspa.1985.0070. ISSN 0080-4630. S2CID 1438116.

^ Bernstein, Ethan; Vazirani, Umesh (1993). "Quantum complexity theory". Proceedings of the twenty-fifth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing – STOC '93. San Diego, California, United States: ACM Press. pp. 11–20. doi:10.1145/167088.167097. ISBN 978-0-89791-591-5. S2CID 676378.

^ Simon, D. R. (1994). "On the power of quantum computation". Proceedings 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science. Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA: IEEE Comput. Soc. Press. pp. 116–123. doi:10.1109/SFCS.1994.365701. ISBN 978-0-8186-6580-6. S2CID 7457814.

^ Nielsen & Chuang 2010, p. 30-32.

^ Shor 1994.

^ Grover, Lov K. (1996). A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search. ACM symposium on Theory of computing. Philadelphia: ACM Press. pp. 212–219. arXiv:quant-ph/9605043. doi:10.1145/237814.237866. ISBN 978-0-89791-785-8.

^ a b Nielsen & Chuang 2010, p. 7.

^ a b Lloyd, Seth (23 August 1996). "Universal Quantum Simulators". Science. 273 (5278): 1073–1078. Bibcode:1996Sci...273.1073L. doi:10.1126/science.273.5278.1073. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 8688088. S2CID 43496899.

^ Cao, Yudong; Romero, Jonathan; Olson, Jonathan P.; Degroote, Matthias; Johnson, Peter D.; et al. (9 October 2019). "Quantum Chemistry in the Age of Quantum Computing". Chemical Reviews. 119 (19): 10856–10915. arXiv:1812.09976. doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803. ISSN 0009-2665. PMID 31469277. S2CID 119417908.

^ a b Grumbling & Horowitz 2019, pp. 164–169.

^ Chuang, Isaac L.; Gershenfeld, Neil; Kubinec, Markdoi (April 1998). "Experimental Implementation of Fast Quantum Searching". Physical Review Letters. 80 (15). American Physical Society: 3408–3411. Bibcode:1998PhRvL..80.3408C. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.80.3408.

^ Holton, William Coffeen. "quantum computer". Encyclopedia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 4 December 2021.

^ Gibney, Elizabeth (23 October 2019). "Hello quantum world! Google publishes landmark quantum supremacy claim". Nature. 574 (7779): 461–462. Bibcode:2019Natur.574..461G. doi:10.1038/d41586-019-03213-z. PMID 31645740.

^ a b Lay summary: Martinis, John; Boixo, Sergio (23 October 2019). "Quantum Supremacy Using a Programmable Superconducting Processor". Nature. 574 (7779). Google AI: 505–510. arXiv:1910.11333. Bibcode:2019Natur.574..505A. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5. PMID 31645734. S2CID 204836822. Retrieved 27 April 2022. • Journal article: Arute, Frank; Arya, Kunal; Babbush, Ryan; Bacon, Dave; Bardin, Joseph C.; et al. (23 October 2019). "Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting processor". Nature. 574 (7779): 505–510. arXiv:1910.11333. Bibcode:2019Natur.574..505A. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5. PMID 31645734. S2CID 204836822.

^ Aaronson, Scott (30 October 2019). "Opinion | Why Google's Quantum Supremacy Milestone Matters". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 25 September 2021.

^ Pednault, Edwin (22 October 2019). "On 'Quantum Supremacy'". IBM Research Blog. Retrieved 9 February 2021.

^ Pan, Feng; Zhang, Pan (4 March 2021). "Simulating the Sycamore quantum supremacy circuits". arXiv:2103.03074 [quant-ph].

^ Bennett, Charlie (31 July 2020). Information Is Quantum: How Physics Helped Explain the Nature of Information and What Can Be Done With It (Videotape).  Event occurs at 1:08:22 – via YouTube.

^ Nielsen & Chuang 2010, p. 13.

^ a b Mermin 2007, p. 17.

^ a b Mermin 2007, p. 18.

^ Aaronson 2013, p. 110.

^ Nielsen & Chuang 2010, p. 30–32.

^ Mermin 2007, pp. 38–39.

^ Kurgalin, Sergei; Borzunov, Sergei (2021). Concise guide to quantum computing: algorithms, exercises, and implementations. Texts in computer science. Cham: Springer. ISBN 978-3-030-65054-4.

^ Das, A.; Chakrabarti, B. K. (2008). "Quantum Annealing and Analog Quantum Computation". Rev. Mod. Phys. 80 (3): 1061–1081. arXiv:0801.2193. Bibcode:2008RvMP...80.1061D. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.563.9990. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.80.1061. S2CID 14255125.

^ Nayak, Chetan; Simon, Steven; Stern, Ady; Das Sarma, Sankar (2008). "Nonabelian Anyons and Quantum Computation". Reviews of Modern Physics. 80 (3): 1083–1159. arXiv:0707.1889. Bibcode:2008RvMP...80.1083N. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.80.1083. S2CID 119628297.

^ Chi-Chih Yao, A. (1993). "Quantum circuit complexity". Proceedings of 1993 IEEE 34th Annual Foundations of Computer Science. pp. 352–361. doi:10.1109/SFCS.1993.366852. ISBN 0-8186-4370-6. S2CID 195866146.

^ Raussendorf, Robert; Browne, Daniel E.; Briegel, Hans J. (25 August 2003). "Measurement-based quantum computation on cluster states". Physical Review A. 68 (2): 022312. arXiv:quant-ph/0301052. Bibcode:2003PhRvA..68b2312R. doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.68.022312. S2CID 6197709.

^ Aharonov, Dorit; van Dam, Wim; Kempe, Julia; Landau, Zeph; Lloyd, Seth; Regev, Oded (1 January 2008). "Adiabatic Quantum Computation Is Equivalent to Standard Quantum Computation". SIAM Review. 50 (4): 755–787. arXiv:quant-ph/0405098. Bibcode:2008SIAMR..50..755A. doi:10.1137/080734479. ISSN 0036-1445. S2CID 1503123.

^ Freedman, Michael H.; Larsen, Michael; Wang, Zhenghan (1 June 2002). "A Modular Functor Which is Universal for Quantum Computation". Communications in Mathematical Physics. 227 (3): 605–622. arXiv:quant-ph/0001108. Bibcode:2002CMaPh.227..605F. doi:10.1007/s002200200645. ISSN 0010-3616. S2CID 8990600.

^ Nielsen & Chuang 2010, p. 481.

^ a b c d Preskill, John (6 August 2018). "Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and beyond". Quantum. 2: 79. arXiv:1801.00862. Bibcode:2018Quant...2...79P. doi:10.22331/q-2018-08-06-79. S2CID 44098998.

^ Bluvstein, Dolev; Evered, Simon J.; Geim, Alexandra A.; Li, Sophie H.; Zhou, Hengyun; Manovitz, Tom; Ebadi, Sepehr; Cain, Madelyn; Kalinowski, Marcin; Hangleiter, Dominik; Ataides, J. Pablo Bonilla; Maskara, Nishad; Cong, Iris; Gao, Xun; Rodriguez, Pedro Sales (6 December 2023). "Logical quantum processor based on reconfigurable atom arrays". Nature. 626 (7997): 58–65. arXiv:2312.03982. doi:10.1038/s41586-023-06927-3. ISSN 1476-4687. PMC 10830422. PMID 38056497. S2CID 266052773.

^ Freedberg Jr., Sydney J. (7 December 2023). "'Off to the races': DARPA, Harvard breakthrough brings quantum computing years closer". Breaking Defense. Retrieved 9 December 2023.

^ "DARPA-Funded Research Leads to Quantum Computing Breakthrough". darpa.mil. 6 December 2023. Retrieved 5 January 2024.

^ Choudhury, Rizwan (30 December 2023). "Top 7 innovation stories of 2023 – Interesting Engineering". interestingengineering.com. Retrieved 6 January 2024.

^ Pirandola, S.; Andersen, U. L.; Banchi, L.; Berta, M.; Bunandar, D.; Colbeck, R.; Englund, D.; Gehring, T.; Lupo, C.; Ottaviani, C.; Pereira, J.; Razavi, M.; Shamsul Shaari, J.; Tomamichel, M.; Usenko, V. C.; Vallone, G.; Villoresi, P.; Wallden, P. (2020). "Advances in quantum cryptography". Advances in Optics and Photonics. 12 (4): 1012–1236. arXiv:1906.01645. Bibcode:2020AdOP...12.1012P. doi:10.1364/AOP.361502.

^ Inderwildi, Oliver (14 April 2025). "The Quantum Computing Revolution: From Technological Opportunity to Geopolitical Power Shift". The Geopolitical Economist. Retrieved 14 April 2025.

^ Pirandola, S.; Andersen, U. L.; Banchi, L.; Berta, M.; Bunandar, D.; Colbeck, R.; Englund, D.; Gehring, T.; Lupo, C.; Ottaviani, C.; Pereira, J. L.; Razavi, M.; Shamsul Shaari, J.; Tomamichel, M.; Usenko, V. C. (14 December 2020). "Advances in quantum cryptography". Advances in Optics and Photonics. 12 (4): 1017. arXiv:1906.01645. Bibcode:2020AdOP...12.1012P. doi:10.1364/AOP.361502. ISSN 1943-8206. S2CID 174799187.

^ Xu, Feihu; Ma, Xiongfeng; Zhang, Qiang; Lo, Hoi-Kwong; Pan, Jian-Wei (26 May 2020). "Secure quantum key distribution with realistic devices". Reviews of Modern Physics. 92 (2): 025002-3. arXiv:1903.09051. Bibcode:2020RvMP...92b5002X. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.92.025002. S2CID 210942877.

^ Xu, Guobin; Mao, Jianzhou; Sakk, Eric; Wang, Shuangbao Paul (22 March 2023). "An Overview of Quantum-Safe Approaches: Quantum Key Distribution and Post-Quantum Cryptography". 2023 57th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS). IEEE. p. 3. doi:10.1109/CISS56502.2023.10089619. ISBN 978-1-6654-5181-9.

^ Kozlowski, Wojciech; Wehner, Stephanie (25 September 2019). "Towards Large-Scale Quantum Networks". Proceedings of the Sixth Annual ACM International Conference on Nanoscale Computing and Communication. ACM. pp. 1–7. arXiv:1909.08396. doi:10.1145/3345312.3345497. ISBN 978-1-4503-6897-1.

^ Guo, Xueshi; Breum, Casper R.; Borregaard, Johannes; Izumi, Shuro; Larsen, Mikkel V.; Gehring, Tobias; Christandl, Matthias; Neergaard-Nielsen, Jonas S.; Andersen, Ulrik L. (23 December 2019). "Distributed quantum sensing in a continuous-variable entangled network". Nature Physics. 16 (3): 281–284. arXiv:1905.09408. doi:10.1038/s41567-019-0743-x. ISSN 1745-2473. S2CID 256703226.

^ a b c Jordan, Stephen (14 October 2022) [22 April 2011]. "Quantum Algorithm Zoo". Archived from the original on 29 April 2018.

^ Aaronson, Scott; Arkhipov, Alex (6 June 2011). "The computational complexity of linear optics". Proceedings of the forty-third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing. San Jose, California: Association for Computing Machinery. pp. 333–342. arXiv:1011.3245. doi:10.1145/1993636.1993682. ISBN 978-1-4503-0691-1.

^ a b Nielsen & Chuang 2010, p. 42.

^ Norton, Quinn (15 February 2007). "The Father of Quantum Computing". Wired.

^ Ambainis, Andris (Spring 2014). "What Can We Do with a Quantum Computer?". Institute for Advanced Study.

^ Chang, Kenneth (14 June 2023). "Quantum Computing Advance Begins New Era, IBM Says – A quantum computer came up with better answers to a physics problem than a conventional supercomputer". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 June 2023. Retrieved 15 June 2023.

^ Kim, Youngseok; et al. (14 June 2023). "Evidence for the utility of quantum computing before fault tolerance". Nature. 618 (7965): 500–505. Bibcode:2023Natur.618..500K. doi:10.1038/s41586-023-06096-3. PMC 10266970. PMID 37316724.

^ Morello, Andrea (21 November 2018). Lunch & Learn: Quantum Computing. Sibos TV. Archived from the original on 15 February 2021. Retrieved 4 February 2021 – via YouTube.{{cite AV media}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)

^ Ruane, Jonathan; McAfee, Andrew; Oliver, William D. (1 January 2022). "Quantum Computing for Business Leaders". Harvard Business Review. ISSN 0017-8012. Retrieved 12 April 2023.

^ Budde, Florian; Volz, Daniel (12 July 2019). "Quantum computing and the chemical industry | McKinsey". www.mckinsey.com. McKinsey and Company. Retrieved 12 April 2023.

^ Bourzac, Katherine (30 October 2017). "Chemistry is quantum computing's killer app". cen.acs.org. American Chemical Society. Retrieved 12 April 2023.

^ Lenstra, Arjen K. (2000). "Integer Factoring" (PDF). Designs, Codes and Cryptography. 19 (2/3): 101–128. doi:10.1023/A:1008397921377. S2CID 9816153. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2015.

^ Nielsen & Chuang 2010, p. 216.

^ a b Bernstein, Daniel J. (2009). "Introduction to post-quantum cryptography". Post-Quantum Cryptography. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. pp. 1–14. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88702-7_1. ISBN 978-3-540-88701-0. S2CID 61401925.

^ See also pqcrypto.org, a bibliography maintained by Daniel J. Bernstein and Tanja Lange on cryptography not known to be broken by quantum computing.

^ McEliece, R. J. (January 1978). "A Public-Key Cryptosystem Based On Algebraic Coding Theory" (PDF). DSNPR. 44: 114–116. Bibcode:1978DSNPR..44..114M.

^ Kobayashi, H.; Gall, F. L. (2006). "Dihedral Hidden Subgroup Problem: A Survey". Information and Media Technologies. 1 (1): 178–185. doi:10.2197/ipsjdc.1.470.

^ Bennett, Charles H.; Bernstein, Ethan; Brassard, Gilles; Vazirani, Umesh (October 1997). "Strengths and Weaknesses of Quantum Computing". SIAM Journal on Computing. 26 (5): 1510–1523. arXiv:quant-ph/9701001. Bibcode:1997quant.ph..1001B. doi:10.1137/s0097539796300933. S2CID 13403194.

^ Brassard, Gilles; Høyer, Peter; Tapp, Alain (2016). "Quantum Algorithm for the Collision Problem". In Kao, Ming-Yang (ed.). Encyclopedia of Algorithms. New York, New York: Springer. pp. 1662–1664. arXiv:quant-ph/9705002. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2864-4_304. ISBN 978-1-4939-2864-4. S2CID 3116149.

^ Farhi, Edward; Goldstone, Jeffrey; Gutmann, Sam (23 December 2008). "A Quantum Algorithm for the Hamiltonian NAND Tree". Theory of Computing. 4 (1): 169–190. doi:10.4086/toc.2008.v004a008. ISSN 1557-2862. S2CID 8258191.

^ Williams, Colin P. (2011). Explorations in Quantum Computing. Springer. pp. 242–244. ISBN 978-1-84628-887-6.

^ Grover, Lov (29 May 1996). "A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search". arXiv:quant-ph/9605043.

^ Ambainis, Ambainis (June 2004). "Quantum search algorithms". ACM SIGACT News. 35 (2): 22–35. arXiv:quant-ph/0504012. Bibcode:2005quant.ph..4012A. doi:10.1145/992287.992296. S2CID 11326499.

^ Rich, Steven; Gellman, Barton (1 February 2014). "NSA seeks to build quantum computer that could crack most types of encryption". The Washington Post.

^ Outeiral, Carlos; Strahm, Martin; Morris, Garrett; Benjamin, Simon; Deane, Charlotte; Shi, Jiye (2021). "The prospects of quantum computing in computational molecular biology". WIREs Computational Molecular Science. 11. arXiv:2005.12792. doi:10.1002/wcms.1481. S2CID 218889377.

^ Biamonte, Jacob; Wittek, Peter; Pancotti, Nicola; Rebentrost, Patrick; Wiebe, Nathan; Lloyd, Seth (September 2017). "Quantum machine learning". Nature. 549 (7671): 195–202. arXiv:1611.09347. Bibcode:2017Natur.549..195B. doi:10.1038/nature23474. ISSN 0028-0836. PMID 28905917. S2CID 64536201.

^ Harrow, Aram; Hassidim, Avinatan; Lloyd, Seth (2009). "Quantum algorithm for solving linear systems of equations". Physical Review Letters. 103 (15): 150502. arXiv:0811.3171. Bibcode:2009PhRvL.103o0502H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.103.150502. PMID 19905613. S2CID 5187993.

^ Benedetti, Marcello; Realpe-Gómez, John; Biswas, Rupak; Perdomo-Ortiz, Alejandro (9 August 2016). "Estimation of effective temperatures in quantum annealers for sampling applications: A case study with possible applications in deep learning". Physical Review A. 94 (2): 022308. arXiv:1510.07611. Bibcode:2016PhRvA..94b2308B. doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.94.022308.

^ Ajagekar, Akshay; You, Fengqi (5 December 2020). "Quantum computing assisted deep learning for fault detection and diagnosis in industrial process systems". Computers & Chemical Engineering. 143: 107119. arXiv:2003.00264. doi:10.1016/j.compchemeng.2020.107119. ISSN 0098-1354. S2CID 211678230.

^ Ajagekar, Akshay; You, Fengqi (1 December 2021). "Quantum computing based hybrid deep learning for fault diagnosis in electrical power systems". Applied Energy. 303: 117628. Bibcode:2021ApEn..30317628A. doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.117628. ISSN 0306-2619.

^ Gao, Xun; Anschuetz, Eric R.; Wang, Sheng-Tao; Cirac, J. Ignacio; Lukin, Mikhail D. (2022). "Enhancing Generative Models via Quantum Correlations". Physical Review X. 12 (2): 021037. arXiv:2101.08354. Bibcode:2022PhRvX..12b1037G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevX.12.021037. S2CID 231662294.

^ Li, Junde; Topaloglu, Rasit; Ghosh, Swaroop (9 January 2021). "Quantum Generative Models for Small Molecule Drug Discovery". arXiv:2101.03438 [cs.ET].

^ a b c 
Brooks, Michael (24 May 2023). "Quantum computers: what are they good for?". Nature. 617 (7962): S1 – S3. Bibcode:2023Natur.617S...1B. doi:10.1038/d41586-023-01692-9. PMID 37225885. S2CID 258847001.

^ a b c d Torsten Hoefler; Thomas Häner; Matthias Troyer (May 2023). "Disentangling Hype from Practicality: On Realistically Achieving Quantum Advantage". Communications of the ACM.

^ Dyakonov, Mikhail (15 November 2018). "The Case Against Quantum Computing". IEEE Spectrum.

^ DiVincenzo, David P. (13 April 2000). "The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation". Fortschritte der Physik. 48 (9–11): 771–783. arXiv:quant-ph/0002077. Bibcode:2000ForPh..48..771D. doi:10.1002/1521-3978(200009)48:9/11<771::AID-PROP771>3.0.CO;2-E. S2CID 15439711.

^ Giles, Martin (17 January 2019). "We'd have more quantum computers if it weren't so hard to find the damn cables". MIT Technology Review. Retrieved 17 May 2021.

^ Pauka SJ, Das K, Kalra B, Moini A, Yang Y, Trainer M, Bousquet A, Cantaloube C, Dick N, Gardner GC, Manfra MJ, Reilly DJ (2021). "A cryogenic CMOS chip for generating control signals for multiple qubits". Nature Electronics. 4 (4): 64–70. arXiv:1912.01299. doi:10.1038/s41928-020-00528-y. S2CID 231715555.

^ DiVincenzo, David P. (1995). "Quantum Computation". Science. 270 (5234): 255–261. Bibcode:1995Sci...270..255D. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.242.2165. doi:10.1126/science.270.5234.255. S2CID 220110562.

^ Zu, H.; Dai, W.; de Waele, A.T.A.M. (2022). "Development of Dilution refrigerators – A review". Cryogenics. 121. doi:10.1016/j.cryogenics.2021.103390. ISSN 0011-2275. S2CID 244005391.

^ Jones, Nicola (19 June 2013). "Computing: The quantum company". Nature. 498 (7454): 286–288. Bibcode:2013Natur.498..286J. doi:10.1038/498286a. PMID 23783610.

^ Vepsäläinen, Antti P.; Karamlou, Amir H.; Orrell, John L.; Dogra, Akshunna S.; Loer, Ben; et al. (August 2020). "Impact of ionizing radiation on superconducting qubit coherence". Nature. 584 (7822): 551–556. arXiv:2001.09190. Bibcode:2020Natur.584..551V. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2619-8. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 32848227. S2CID 210920566.

^ Amy, Matthew; Matteo, Olivia; Gheorghiu, Vlad; Mosca, Michele; Parent, Alex; Schanck, John (30 November 2016). "Estimating the cost of generic quantum pre-image attacks on SHA-2 and SHA-3". arXiv:1603.09383 [quant-ph].

^ Dyakonov, M. I. (14 October 2006). S. Luryi; Xu, J.; Zaslavsky, A. (eds.). "Is Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computation Really Possible?". Future Trends in Microelectronics. Up the Nano Creek: 4–18. arXiv:quant-ph/0610117. Bibcode:2006quant.ph.10117D.

^ Ahsan, Muhammad (2015). Architecture Framework for Trapped-ion Quantum Computer based on Performance Simulation Tool. Bibcode:2015PhDT........56A. OCLC 923881411.

^ Ahsan, Muhammad; Meter, Rodney Van; Kim, Jungsang (28 December 2016). "Designing a Million-Qubit Quantum Computer Using a Resource Performance Simulator". ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems. 12 (4): 39:1–39:25. arXiv:1512.00796. doi:10.1145/2830570. ISSN 1550-4832. S2CID 1258374.

^ Gidney, Craig; Ekerå, Martin (15 April 2021). "How to factor 2048 bit RSA integers in 8 hours using 20 million noisy qubits". Quantum. 5: 433. arXiv:1905.09749. Bibcode:2021Quant...5..433G. doi:10.22331/q-2021-04-15-433. ISSN 2521-327X. S2CID 162183806.

^ Freedman, Michael H.; Kitaev, Alexei; Larsen, Michael J.; Wang, Zhenghan (2003). "Topological quantum computation". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society. 40 (1): 31–38. arXiv:quant-ph/0101025. doi:10.1090/S0273-0979-02-00964-3. MR 1943131.

^ Monroe, Don (1 October 2008). "Anyons: The breakthrough quantum computing needs?". New Scientist.

^ Preskill, John (26 March 2012). "Quantum computing and the entanglement frontier". arXiv:1203.5813 [quant-ph].

^ Preskill, John (6 August 2018). "Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and beyond". Quantum. 2: 79. arXiv:1801.00862. Bibcode:2018Quant...2...79P. doi:10.22331/q-2018-08-06-79.

^ Boixo, Sergio; Isakov, Sergei V.; Smelyanskiy, Vadim N.; Babbush, Ryan; Ding, Nan; et al. (2018). "Characterizing Quantum Supremacy in Near-Term Devices". Nature Physics. 14 (6): 595–600. arXiv:1608.00263. Bibcode:2018NatPh..14..595B. doi:10.1038/s41567-018-0124-x. S2CID 4167494.

^ Savage, Neil (5 July 2017). "Quantum Computers Compete for "Supremacy"". Scientific American.

^ Giles, Martin (20 September 2019). "Google researchers have reportedly achieved 'quantum supremacy'". MIT Technology Review. Retrieved 15 May 2020.

^ Tavares, Frank (23 October 2019). "Google and NASA Achieve Quantum Supremacy". NASA. Retrieved 16 November 2021.

^ Pednault, Edwin; Gunnels, John A.; Nannicini, Giacomo; Horesh, Lior; Wisnieff, Robert (22 October 2019). "Leveraging Secondary Storage to Simulate Deep 54-qubit Sycamore Circuits". arXiv:1910.09534 [quant-ph].

^ Cho, Adrian (23 October 2019). "IBM casts doubt on Google's claims of quantum supremacy". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aaz6080. ISSN 0036-8075. S2CID 211982610.

^ Liu, Yong (Alexander); Liu, Xin (Lucy); Li, Fang (Nancy); Fu, Haohuan; Yang, Yuling; et al. (14 November 2021). "Closing the "quantum supremacy" gap". Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis. SC '21. New York, New York: Association for Computing Machinery. pp. 1–12. arXiv:2110.14502. doi:10.1145/3458817.3487399. ISBN 978-1-4503-8442-1. S2CID 239036985.

^ Bulmer, Jacob F. F.; Bell, Bryn A.; Chadwick, Rachel S.; Jones, Alex E.; Moise, Diana; et al. (28 January 2022). "The boundary for quantum advantage in Gaussian boson sampling". Science Advances. 8 (4): eabl9236. arXiv:2108.01622. Bibcode:2022SciA....8.9236B. doi:10.1126/sciadv.abl9236. ISSN 2375-2548. PMC 8791606. PMID 35080972.

^ McCormick, Katie (10 February 2022). "Race Not Over Between Classical and Quantum Computers". Physics. 15: 19. Bibcode:2022PhyOJ..15...19M. doi:10.1103/Physics.15.19. S2CID 246910085.

^ Pan, Feng; Chen, Keyang; Zhang, Pan (2022). "Solving the Sampling Problem of the Sycamore Quantum Circuits". Physical Review Letters. 129 (9): 090502. arXiv:2111.03011. Bibcode:2022PhRvL.129i0502P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.129.090502. PMID 36083655. S2CID 251755796.

^ Cho, Adrian (2 August 2022). "Ordinary computers can beat Google's quantum computer after all". Science. 377. doi:10.1126/science.ade2364.

^ "Google's 'quantum supremacy' usurped by researchers using ordinary supercomputer". TechCrunch. 5 August 2022. Retrieved 7 August 2022.

^ Ball, Philip (3 December 2020). "Physicists in China challenge Google's 'quantum advantage'". Nature. 588 (7838): 380. Bibcode:2020Natur.588..380B. doi:10.1038/d41586-020-03434-7. PMID 33273711. S2CID 227282052.

^ Garisto, Daniel. "Light-based Quantum Computer Exceeds Fastest Classical Supercomputers". Scientific American. Retrieved 7 December 2020.

^ Conover, Emily (3 December 2020). "The new light-based quantum computer Jiuzhang has achieved quantum supremacy". Science News. Retrieved 7 December 2020.

^ Zhong, Han-Sen; Wang, Hui; Deng, Yu-Hao; Chen, Ming-Cheng; Peng, Li-Chao; et al. (3 December 2020). "Quantum computational advantage using photons". Science. 370 (6523): 1460–1463. arXiv:2012.01625. Bibcode:2020Sci...370.1460Z. doi:10.1126/science.abe8770. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 33273064. S2CID 227254333.

^ Roberson, Tara M. (21 May 2020). "{{subst:title case|Can hype be a force for good?}}". Public Understanding of Science. 29 (5): 544–552. doi:10.1177/0963662520923109. ISSN 0963-6625. PMID 32438851. S2CID 218831653.

^ Cavaliere, Fabio; Mattsson, John; Smeets, Ben (September 2020). "The security implications of quantum cryptography and quantum computing". Network Security. 2020 (9): 9–15. doi:10.1016/S1353-4858(20)30105-7. ISSN 1353-4858. S2CID 222349414.

^ Liu, Yong; Chen, Yaojian; Guo, Chu; Song, Jiawei; Shi, Xinmin; Gan, Lin; Wu, Wenzhao; Wu, Wei; Fu, Haohuan; Liu, Xin; Chen, Dexun; Zhao, Zhifeng; Yang, Guangwen; Gao, Jiangang (16 January 2024). "Verifying Quantum Advantage Experiments with Multiple Amplitude Tensor Network Contraction". Physical Review Letters. 132 (3): 030601. arXiv:2212.04749. Bibcode:2024PhRvL.132c0601L. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.132.030601. ISSN 0031-9007. PMID 38307065.

^ Monroe, Don (December 2022). "Quantum Computers and the Universe". Communications of the ACM.

^ Swayne, Matt (20 June 2023). "PsiQuantum Sees 700x Reduction in Computational Resource Requirements to Break Elliptic Curve Cryptography With a Fault Tolerant Quantum Computer". The Quanrum Insider.

^ Unruh, Bill (1995). "Maintaining coherence in Quantum Computers". Physical Review A. 51 (2): 992–997. arXiv:hep-th/9406058. Bibcode:1995PhRvA..51..992U. doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.51.992. PMID 9911677. S2CID 13980886.

^ Davies, Paul (6 March 2007). "The implications of a holographic universe for quantum information science and the nature of physical law". arXiv:quant-ph/0703041.

^ Regan, K. W. (23 April 2016). "Quantum Supremacy and Complexity". Gödel's Lost Letter and P=NP.

^ Kalai, Gil (May 2016). "The Quantum Computer Puzzle" (PDF). Notices of the AMS. 63 (5): 508–516.

^ Rinott, Yosef; Shoham, Tomer; Kalai, Gil (13 July 2021). "Statistical Aspects of the Quantum Supremacy Demonstration". arXiv:2008.05177 [quant-ph].

^ Dyakonov, Mikhail (15 November 2018). "The Case Against Quantum Computing". IEEE Spectrum. Retrieved 3 December 2019.

^ Russell, John (10 January 2019). "IBM Quantum Update: Q System One Launch, New Collaborators, and QC Center Plans". HPCwire. Retrieved 9 January 2023.

^ Tacchino, Francesco; Chiesa, Alessandro; Carretta, Stefano; Gerace, Dario (19 December 2019). "Quantum Computers as Universal Quantum Simulators: State-of-the-Art and Perspectives". Advanced Quantum Technologies. 3 (3): 1900052. arXiv:1907.03505. doi:10.1002/qute.201900052. ISSN 2511-9044. S2CID 195833616.

^ Grumbling & Horowitz 2019, p. 127.

^ Grumbling & Horowitz 2019, p. 114.

^ Nayak, Chetan; Simon, Steven H.; Stern, Ady; Freedman, Michael; Das Sarma, Sankar (12 September 2008). "Non-Abelian anyons and topological quantum computation". Reviews of Modern Physics. 80 (3): 1083–1159. arXiv:0707.1889. Bibcode:2008RvMP...80.1083N. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.80.1083.

^ Grumbling & Horowitz 2019, p. 119.

^ Grumbling & Horowitz 2019, p. 126.

^ Leong, Kelvin; Sung, Anna (November 2022). "What Business Managers Should Know About Quantum Computing?" (PDF). Journal of Interdisciplinary Sciences. Retrieved 13 August 2023.

^ Nielsen & Chuang 2010, p. 29.

^ Nielsen & Chuang 2010, p. 126.

^ Nielsen & Chuang 2010, p. 41.

^ Nielsen & Chuang 2010, p. 201.

^ Bernstein, Ethan; Vazirani, Umesh (1997). "Quantum Complexity Theory". SIAM Journal on Computing. 26 (5): 1411–1473. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.144.7852. doi:10.1137/S0097539796300921.

Sources

Aaronson, Scott (2013). Quantum Computing Since Democritus. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979309. ISBN 978-0-521-19956-8. OCLC 829706638.
Grumbling, Emily; Horowitz, Mark, eds. (2019). Quantum Computing: Progress and Prospects. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:10.17226/25196. ISBN 978-0-309-47970-7. OCLC 1091904777. S2CID 125635007.
Mermin, N. David (2007). Quantum Computer Science: An Introduction. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511813870. ISBN 978-0-511-34258-5. OCLC 422727925.
Nielsen, Michael; Chuang, Isaac (2010). Quantum Computation and Quantum Information (10th anniversary ed.). doi:10.1017/CBO9780511976667. ISBN 978-0-511-99277-3. OCLC 700706156. S2CID 59717455.
Shor, Peter W. (1994). Algorithms for Quantum Computation: Discrete Logarithms and Factoring. Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science. Santa Fe, New Mexico: IEEE. pp. 124–134. doi:10.1109/SFCS.1994.365700. ISBN 978-0-8186-6580-6.

Further reading

Textbooks

Benenti, Giuliano; Casati, Giulio; Rossini, Davide; Strini, Giuliano (2019). Principles of Quantum Computation and Information: A Comprehensive Textbook (2nd ed.). doi:10.1142/10909. ISBN 978-981-3237-23-0. OCLC 1084428655. S2CID 62280636.
Bernhardt, Chris (2019). Quantum Computing for Everyone. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-35091-4. OCLC 1082867954.
Exman, Iaakov; Pérez-Castillo, Ricardo; Piattini, Mario; Felderer, Michael, eds. (2024). Quantum Software: Aspects of Theory and System Design. Springer Nature. ISBN 978-3-031-64136-7.
Hidary, Jack D. (2021). Quantum Computing: An Applied Approach (2nd ed.). doi:10.1007/978-3-030-83274-2. ISBN 978-3-03-083274-2. OCLC 1272953643. S2CID 238223274.
Hiroshi, Imai; Masahito, Hayashi, eds. (2006). Quantum Computation and Information: From Theory to Experiment. Topics in Applied Physics. Vol. 102. doi:10.1007/3-540-33133-6. ISBN 978-3-540-33133-9.
Hughes, Ciaran; Isaacson, Joshua; Perry, Anastasia; Sun, Ranbel F.; Turner, Jessica (2021). Quantum Computing for the Quantum Curious. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-61601-4. ISBN 978-3-03-061601-4. OCLC 1244536372. S2CID 242566636.
Jaeger, Gregg (2007). Quantum Information: An Overview. doi:10.1007/978-0-387-36944-0. ISBN 978-0-387-36944-0. OCLC 186509710.
Johnston, Eric R.; Harrigan, Nic; Gimeno-Segovia, Mercedes (2019). Programming Quantum Computers: Essential Algorithms and Code Samples. O'Reilly Media, Incorporated. ISBN 978-1-4920-3968-6. OCLC 1111634190.
Kaye, Phillip; Laflamme, Raymond; Mosca, Michele (2007). An Introduction to Quantum Computing. OUP Oxford. ISBN 978-0-19-857000-4. OCLC 85896383.
Kitaev, Alexei Yu.; Shen, Alexander H.; Vyalyi, Mikhail N. (2002). Classical and Quantum Computation. American Mathematical Soc. ISBN 978-0-8218-3229-5. OCLC 907358694.
Kurgalin, Sergei; Borzunov, Sergei (2021). Concise Guide to Quantum Computing: Algorithms, Exercises, and Implementations. Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-65052-0. ISBN 978-3-030-65052-0.
Stolze, Joachim; Suter, Dieter (2004). Quantum Computing: A Short Course from Theory to Experiment. doi:10.1002/9783527617760. ISBN 978-3-527-61776-0. OCLC 212140089.
Susskind, Leonard; Friedman, Art (2014). Quantum Mechanics: The Theoretical Minimum. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-08061-8.
Wichert, Andreas (2020). Principles of Quantum Artificial Intelligence: Quantum Problem Solving and Machine Learning (2nd ed.). doi:10.1142/11938. ISBN 978-981-12-2431-7. OCLC 1178715016. S2CID 225498497.
Wong, Thomas (2022). Introduction to Classical and Quantum Computing (PDF). Rooted Grove. ISBN 979-8-9855931-0-5. OCLC 1308951401. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
Zeng, Bei; Chen, Xie; Zhou, Duan-Lu; Wen, Xiao-Gang (2019). Quantum Information Meets Quantum Matter. arXiv:1508.02595. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-9084-9. ISBN 978-1-4939-9084-9. OCLC 1091358969. S2CID 118528258.

Academic papers

Abbot, Derek; Doering, Charles R.; Caves, Carlton M.; Lidar, Daniel M.; Brandt, Howard E.; et al. (2003). "Dreams versus Reality: Plenary Debate Session on Quantum Computing". Quantum Information Processing. 2 (6): 449–472. arXiv:quant-ph/0310130. Bibcode:2003QuIP....2..449A. doi:10.1023/B:QINP.0000042203.24782.9a. hdl:2027.42/45526. S2CID 34885835.
Berthiaume, Andre (1 December 1998). "Quantum Computation". Solution Manual for Quantum Mechanics. pp. 233–234. doi:10.1142/9789814541893_0016. ISBN 978-981-4541-88-6. S2CID 128255429 – via Semantic Scholar.
DiVincenzo, David P. (2000). "The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation". Fortschritte der Physik. 48 (9–11): 771–783. arXiv:quant-ph/0002077. Bibcode:2000ForPh..48..771D. doi:10.1002/1521-3978(200009)48:9/11<771::AID-PROP771>3.0.CO;2-E. S2CID 15439711.
DiVincenzo, David P. (1995). "Quantum Computation". Science. 270 (5234): 255–261. Bibcode:1995Sci...270..255D. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.242.2165. doi:10.1126/science.270.5234.255. S2CID 220110562. Table 1 lists switching and dephasing times for various systems.
Jeutner, Valentin (2021). "The Quantum Imperative: Addressing the Legal Dimension of Quantum Computers". Morals & Machines. 1 (1): 52–59. doi:10.5771/2747-5174-2021-1-52. S2CID 236664155.
Krantz, P.; Kjaergaard, M.; Yan, F.; Orlando, T. P.; Gustavsson, S.; Oliver, W. D. (17 June 2019). "A Quantum Engineer's Guide to Superconducting Qubits". Applied Physics Reviews. 6 (2): 021318. arXiv:1904.06560. Bibcode:2019ApPRv...6b1318K. doi:10.1063/1.5089550. ISSN 1931-9401. S2CID 119104251.
Mitchell, Ian (1998). "Computing Power into the 21st Century: Moore's Law and Beyond".
Simon, Daniel R. (1994). "On the Power of Quantum Computation". Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Computer Society Press.

External links

Media related to Quantum computer at Wikimedia Commons
 Learning materials related to Quantum computing at Wikiversity
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Quantum Computing" by Amit Hagar and Michael E. Cuffaro.
"Quantum computation, theory of", Encyclopedia of Mathematics, EMS Press, 2001 [1994]
Introduction to Quantum Computing for Business by Koen Groenland

Quantum computing for the determined – 22 video lectures by Michael Nielsen
Video Lectures by David Deutsch
Lomonaco, Sam. Four Lectures on Quantum Computing given at Oxford University in July 2006

vte

Abstract machine
Stored-program computer
Finite-state machine
with datapath
Hierarchical
Deterministic finite automaton
Queue automaton
Cellular automaton
Quantum cellular automaton
Turing machine
Alternating Turing machine
Universal
Post–Turing
Quantum
Nondeterministic Turing machine
Probabilistic Turing machine
Hypercomputation
Zeno machine
Belt machine
Stack machine
Register machines
Counter
Pointer
Random-access
Random-access stored program

with datapath
Hierarchical
Deterministic finite automaton
Queue automaton
Cellular automaton
Quantum cellular automaton

Alternating Turing machine
Universal
Post–Turing
Quantum
Nondeterministic Turing machine
Probabilistic Turing machine
Hypercomputation
Zeno machine

Counter
Pointer
Random-access
Random-access stored program

Microarchitecture
Von Neumann
Harvard
modified
Dataflow
Transport-triggered
Cellular
Endianness
Memory access
NUMA
HUMA
Load–store
Register/memory
Cache hierarchy
Memory hierarchy
Virtual memory
Secondary storage
Heterogeneous
Fabric
Multiprocessing
Cognitive
Neuromorphic

modified

NUMA
HUMA
Load–store
Register/memory

Virtual memory
Secondary storage

Orthogonal instruction set
CISC
RISC
Application-specific
EDGE
TRIPS
VLIW
EPIC
MISC
OISC
NISC
ZISC
VISC architecture
Quantum computing
Comparison
Addressing modes

TRIPS

EPIC

Addressing modes

Motorola 68000 series
VAX
PDP-11
x86
ARM
Stanford MIPS
MIPS
MIPS-X
Power
POWER
PowerPC
Power ISA
Clipper architecture
SPARC
SuperH
DEC Alpha
ETRAX CRIS
M32R
Unicore
Itanium
OpenRISC
RISC-V
MicroBlaze
LMC
System/3x0
S/360
S/370
S/390
z/Architecture
Tilera ISA
VISC architecture
Epiphany architecture
Others

POWER
PowerPC
Power ISA

S/360
S/370
S/390
z/Architecture

Pipeline stall
Operand forwarding
Classic RISC pipeline

Data dependency
Structural
Control
False sharing

Scoreboarding
Tomasulo's algorithm
Reservation station
Re-order buffer
Register renaming
Wide-issue

Reservation station
Re-order buffer

Branch prediction
Memory dependence prediction

Bit
Bit-serial
Word
Instruction
Pipelining
Scalar
Superscalar
Task
Thread
Process
Data
Vector
Memory
Distributed

Bit-serial
Word

Scalar
Superscalar

Thread
Process

Vector

Temporal
Simultaneous
Hyperthreading
Simultaneous and heterogenous
Speculative
Preemptive
Cooperative

Hyperthreading
Simultaneous and heterogenous

SISD
SIMD
Array processing (SIMT)
Pipelined processing
Associative processing
SWAR
MISD
MIMD
SPMD

Array processing (SIMT)
Pipelined processing
Associative processing
SWAR

SPMD

Transistor count
Instructions per cycle (IPC)
Cycles per instruction (CPI)
Instructions per second (IPS)
Floating-point operations per second (FLOPS)
Transactions per second (TPS)
Synaptic updates per second (SUPS)
Performance per watt (PPW)
Cache performance metrics
Computer performance by orders of magnitude

Cycles per instruction (CPI)

Central processing unit (CPU)
Graphics processing unit (GPU)
GPGPU
Vector
Barrel
Stream
Tile processor
Coprocessor
PAL
ASIC
FPGA
FPOA
CPLD
Multi-chip module (MCM)
System in a package (SiP)
Package on a package (PoP)

GPGPU

Embedded system
Microprocessor
Microcontroller
Mobile
Ultra-low-voltage
ASIP
Soft microprocessor

System on a chip (SoC)
Multiprocessor (MPSoC)
Cypress PSoC
Network on a chip (NoC)

Coprocessor
AI accelerator
Graphics processing unit (GPU)
Image processor
Vision processing unit (VPU)
Physics processing unit (PPU)
Digital signal processor (DSP)
Tensor Processing Unit (TPU)
Secure cryptoprocessor
Network processor
Baseband processor

1-bit
4-bit
8-bit
12-bit
15-bit
16-bit
24-bit
32-bit
48-bit
64-bit
128-bit
256-bit
512-bit
bit slicing
others
variable

variable

Single-core
Multi-core
Manycore
Heterogeneous architecture

Core
Cache
CPU cache
Scratchpad memory
Data cache
Instruction cache
replacement policies
coherence
Bus
Clock rate
Clock signal
FIFO

CPU cache
Scratchpad memory
Data cache
Instruction cache
replacement policies
coherence

Arithmetic logic unit (ALU)
Address generation unit (AGU)
Floating-point unit (FPU)
Memory management unit (MMU)
Load–store unit
Translation lookaside buffer (TLB)
Branch predictor
Branch target predictor
Integrated memory controller (IMC)
Memory management unit
Instruction decoder

Load–store unit
Translation lookaside buffer (TLB)

Memory management unit

Combinational
Sequential
Glue
Logic gate
Quantum
Array

Quantum
Array

Processor register
Status register
Stack register
Register file
Memory buffer
Memory address register
Program counter

Hardwired control unit
Instruction unit
Data buffer
Write buffer
Microcode ROM
Counter

Multiplexer
Demultiplexer
Adder
Multiplier
CPU
Binary decoder
Address decoder
Sum-addressed decoder
Barrel shifter

CPU

Address decoder
Sum-addressed decoder

Integrated circuit
3D
Mixed-signal
Power management
Boolean
Digital
Analog
Quantum
Switch

3D
Mixed-signal
Power management

PMU
APM
ACPI
Dynamic frequency scaling
Dynamic voltage scaling
Clock gating
Performance per watt (PPW)

History of general-purpose CPUs
Microprocessor chronology
Processor design
Digital electronics
Hardware security module
Semiconductor device fabrication
Tick–tock model
Pin grid array
Chip carrier

vte

DiVincenzo's criteria
NISQ era
Quantum computing
timeline
Quantum information
Quantum programming
Quantum simulation
Qubit
physical vs. logical
Quantum processors
cloud-based

timeline

physical vs. logical

cloud-based

Bell's
Eastin–Knill
Gleason's
Gottesman–Knill
Holevo's
No-broadcasting
No-cloning
No-communication
No-deleting
No-hiding
No-teleportation
PBR
Quantum speed limit
Threshold
Solovay–Kitaev
Schrödinger-HJW

Classical capacity
entanglement-assisted
quantum capacity
Entanglement distillation
Entanglement swapping
Monogamy of entanglement
LOCC
Quantum channel
quantum network
State purification
Quantum teleportation
quantum energy teleportation
quantum gate teleportation
Superdense coding

entanglement-assisted
quantum capacity

quantum network

quantum energy teleportation
quantum gate teleportation

Post-quantum cryptography
Quantum coin flipping
Quantum money
Quantum key distribution
BB84
SARG04
other protocols
Quantum secret sharing

BB84
SARG04
other protocols

Algorithmic cooling
Amplitude amplification
Bernstein–Vazirani
BHT
Boson sampling
Deutsch–Jozsa
Grover's
HHL
Hidden subgroup
Magic state distillation
Quantum annealing
Quantum counting
Quantum Fourier transform
Quantum optimization
Quantum phase estimation
Shor's
Simon's
VQE

BQP
DQC1
EQP
QIP
QMA
PostBQP

Quantum supremacy
Quantum volume
Randomized benchmarking
XEB
Relaxation times
T1
T2

XEB

T1
T2

Adiabatic quantum computation
Continuous-variable quantum information
One-way quantum computer
cluster state
Quantum circuit
quantum logic gate
Quantum machine learning
quantum neural network
Quantum Turing machine
Topological quantum computer
Hamiltonian quantum computation

cluster state

quantum logic gate

quantum neural network

Codes
5 qubit
CSS
quantum convolutional
stabilizer
Shor
Bacon–Shor
Steane
Toric
gnu
Entanglement-assisted

5 qubit
CSS
quantum convolutional
stabilizer
Shor
Bacon–Shor
Steane
Toric
gnu

Cavity QED
Circuit QED
Linear optical QC
KLM protocol

Neutral atom QC
Trapped-ion QC

Kane QC
Spin qubit QC
NV center
NMR QC

Charge qubit
Flux qubit
Phase qubit
Transmon

OpenQASM–Qiskit–IBM QX
Quil–Forest/Rigetti QCS
Cirq
Q#
libquantum
many others...

Quantum information science
 Quantum mechanics topics

vte

algorithms
amplifier
bus
cellular automata
channel
circuit
complexity theory
computing
cryptography
post-quantum
dynamics
electronics
error correction
finite automata
image processing
imaging
information
key distribution
logic
logic clock
logic gate
machine
machine learning
metamaterial
network
neural network
optics
programming
sensing
simulator
teleportation

post-quantum

Acoustic levitation
Anti-gravity
Cloak of invisibility
Digital scent technology
Force field
Plasma window
Immersive virtual reality
Magnetic refrigeration
Phased-array optics
Thermoacoustic heat engine

Plasma window

List

vte

Introduction
History
Timeline
Classical mechanics
Old quantum theory
Glossary

Timeline

Born rule
Bra–ket notation
 Complementarity
Density matrix
Energy level
Ground state
Excited state
Degenerate levels
Zero-point energy
Entanglement
Hamiltonian
Interference
Decoherence
Measurement
Nonlocality
Quantum state
Superposition
Tunnelling
Scattering theory
Symmetry in quantum mechanics
Uncertainty
Wave function
Collapse
Wave–particle duality

Ground state
Excited state
Degenerate levels
Zero-point energy

Collapse
Wave–particle duality

Formulations
Heisenberg
Interaction
Matrix mechanics
Schrödinger
Path integral formulation
Phase space

Klein–Gordon
Dirac
Weyl
Majorana
Rarita–Schwinger
Pauli
Rydberg
Schrödinger

Bayesian
Consciousness causes collapse
Consistent histories
Copenhagen
de Broglie–Bohm
Ensemble
Hidden-variable
Local
Superdeterminism
Many-worlds
Objective collapse
Quantum logic
Relational
Transactional

Local
Superdeterminism

Superdeterminism

Bell test
Davisson–Germer
Delayed-choice quantum eraser
Double-slit
Franck–Hertz
Mach–Zehnder interferometer
Elitzur–Vaidman
Popper
Quantum eraser
Stern–Gerlach
Wheeler's delayed choice

Quantum biology
Quantum chemistry
Quantum chaos
Quantum cosmology
Quantum differential calculus
Quantum dynamics
Quantum geometry
Quantum measurement problem
Quantum mind
Quantum stochastic calculus
Quantum spacetime

Quantum algorithms
Quantum amplifier
Quantum bus
Quantum cellular automata
Quantum finite automata
Quantum channel
Quantum circuit
Quantum complexity theory
Quantum computing
Timeline
Quantum cryptography
Quantum electronics
Quantum error correction
Quantum imaging
Quantum image processing
Quantum information
Quantum key distribution
Quantum logic
Quantum logic gates
Quantum machine
Quantum machine learning
Quantum metamaterial
Quantum metrology
Quantum network
Quantum neural network
Quantum optics
Quantum programming
Quantum sensing
Quantum simulator
Quantum teleportation

Quantum finite automata

Timeline

Quantum fluctuation
Casimir effect
Quantum statistical mechanics
Quantum field theory
History
Quantum gravity
Relativistic quantum mechanics

History

Schrödinger's cat
in popular culture
Wigner's friend
EPR paradox
Quantum mysticism

in popular culture

Category

United StatesCzech RepublicIsrael

