Tennis is a racket sport that is played either individually against a single opponent (singles) or between two teams of two players each (doubles). Each player uses a tennis racket strung with a cord to strike a hollow rubber ball covered with felt over or around a net and into the opponent's court. The object is to manoeuvre the ball in such a way that the opponent is not able to play a valid return. If a player is unable to return the ball successfully, the opponent scores a point.[1][2]

Playable at all levels of society and at all ages, tennis can be played by anyone who can hold a racket, including wheelchair users. The original forms of tennis developed in France during the late Middle Ages.[3] The modern form of tennis originated in Birmingham, England, in the late 19th century as lawn tennis.[4] It had close connections to various field (lawn) games such as croquet and bowls as well as to the older racket sport today called real tennis.[5]

The rules of modern tennis have changed little since the 1890s. Two exceptions are that until 1961 the server had to keep one foot on the ground at all times,[6][7] and the adoption of the tiebreak in the 1970s.[8] A recent addition to professional tennis has been the adoption of electronic review technology coupled with a point-challenge system, which allows a player to contest the line call of a point, a system known as Hawk-Eye.[9][10]

Tennis is played by millions of recreational players and is a popular worldwide spectator sport.[11] The four Grand Slam tournaments (also referred to as the majors) are especially popular and are considered the highest level of competition for the sport. These tournaments are the Australian Open, played on hardcourts; the French Open, played on red clay courts; Wimbledon, played on grass courts; and the US Open, also played on hardcourts.[12] Additionally, tennis was one of the original Olympic sports, and has been consistently competed in the Summer Olympic Games since 1988.

History

Predecessors

Historians believe that the game's ancient origin lay in 12th-century northern France, where a ball was struck with the palm of the hand.[13] Louis X of France was a keen player of jeu de paume ("game of the palm"), which evolved into real tennis, and became notable as the first person to construct indoor tennis courts in the modern style. Louis was unhappy with playing tennis outdoors and accordingly had indoor, enclosed courts made in Paris "around the end of the 13th century".[14] In due course this design spread across royal palaces all over Europe.[14] In June 1316 at Vincennes, Val-de-Marne, and following a particularly exhausting game, Louis drank a large quantity of cooled wine and subsequently died of either pneumonia or pleurisy, although there was also suspicion of poisoning.[15] Because of the contemporary accounts of his death, Louis X is history's first tennis player known by name.[15] Another of the early enthusiasts of the game was King Charles V of France, who had a court set up at the Louvre Palace.[16]

The word tennis probably comes from the French term tenez, which can be translated as "hold!", "receive!" or "take!", an interjection used as a call from the server to his opponent.[17] It was popular in England and France, although the game was only played indoors, where the ball could be hit off the wall. Henry VIII of England was a big fan of this game, which is now known as real tennis.[18]

An epitaph in St Michael's Church, Coventry, written c. 1705, read, in part:[19]

Here lyes an old toss'd Tennis Ball:
Was racketted, from spring to fall,
With so much heat and so much hast,
Time's arm for shame grew tyred at last.

During the 18th and early 19th centuries, as real tennis declined, new racket sports emerged in England.[20]

The invention of the first lawn mower in Britain in 1830 is believed to have been a catalyst for the preparation of modern-style grass courts, sporting ovals, playing fields, pitches, greens, etc. This in turn led to the codification of modern rules for many sports, including lawn tennis, most football codes, lawn bowls and others.[21]

Origins of the modern game

Between 1859 and 1865, Harry Gem, a solicitor, and his friend Augurio Perera developed a game that combined elements of racquets and the Basque ball game pelota, which they played on Perera's croquet lawn in Birmingham, England.[22][23] In 1872, along with two local doctors, they founded the world's first tennis club on Avenue Road, Leamington Spa.[24] This is where "lawn tennis" was used as the name of an activity by a club for the first time.

In Tennis: A Cultural History, Heiner Gillmeister reveals that on 8 December 1874, British army officer Walter Clopton Wingfield wrote to Harry Gem, commenting that he (Wingfield) had been experimenting with his version of lawn tennis "for a year and a half".[25] In December 1873, Wingfield designed and patented a game which he called sphairistikè (Greek: σφαιριστική, meaning "ball-playing"), and which was soon known simply as "sticky" – for the amusement of guests at a garden party on his friend's estate of Nantclwyd Hall, in Llanelidan, Wales.[26] According to R. D. C. Evans, turfgrass agronomist, "Sports historians all agree that [Wingfield] deserves much of the credit for the development of modern tennis."[20][27] According to Honor Godfrey, museum curator at Wimbledon, Wingfield "popularized this game enormously. He produced a boxed set which included a net, poles, rackets, balls for playing the game – and most importantly you had his rules. He was absolutely terrific at marketing and he sent his game all over the world. He had very good connections with the clergy, the law profession, and the aristocracy and he sent thousands of sets out in the first year or so, in 1874."[28] The world's oldest annual tennis tournament took place at Leamington Lawn Tennis Club in Birmingham in 1874.[29] This was three years before the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club would hold its first championships at Wimbledon, in 1877. The first Championships culminated in a significant debate on how to standardise the rules.[28]

In the United States in 1874, Mary Ewing Outerbridge, a young socialite, returned from Bermuda with a sphairistikè set. She became fascinated by the game of tennis after watching British army officers play.[30] She laid out a tennis court at the Staten Island Cricket Club at Camp Washington, Tompkinsville, Staten Island, New York. The first American National championship was played there in September 1880. An Englishman named O.E. Woodhouse won the singles title, and a silver cup worth $100, by defeating Canadian I. F. Hellmuth.[31] There was also a doubles match which was won by a local pair. There were different rules at each club. The ball in Boston was larger than the one normally used in New York.

On 21 May 1881, the oldest nationwide tennis organization in the world[32] was formed, the United States National Lawn Tennis Association (now the United States Tennis Association) in order to standardize the rules and organize competitions.[33] The US National Men's Singles Championship, now the US Open, was first held in 1881 at the Newport Casino, Newport, Rhode Island.[34] The US National Women's Singles Championships were first held in 1887 in Philadelphia.[35]

Tennis also became popular in France, where the French Championships date to 1891, although until 1925 they were open only to tennis players who were members of French clubs.[36] Thus, Wimbledon, the US Open, the French Open and the Australian Open (dating to 1905) became and have remained the most prestigious events in tennis.[37][38] Together, these four events are called the Majors or Slams (a term borrowed from bridge rather than baseball).[39]

In 1913, the International Lawn Tennis Federation (ILTF), now the International Tennis Federation (ITF), was founded and established three official tournaments as the major championships of the day. The World Grass Court Championships were awarded to Great Britain. The World Hard Court Championships were awarded to France; the term "hard court" was used for clay courts at the time. Some tournaments were held in Belgium instead. And the World Covered Court Championships for indoor courts were awarded annually; Sweden, France, Great Britain, Denmark, Switzerland and Spain each hosted the tournament.[40] At a meeting held on 16 March 1923 in Paris, the title "World Championship" was dropped and a new category of "Official Championship" was created for events in Great Britain, France, the US and Australia [41] – today's Grand Slam events.[40][42] The impact on the four recipient nations to replace the "world championships" with "official championships" was simple in a general sense: each became a major nation of the federation with enhanced voting power, and each now operated a major event.[40]

The comprehensive rules promulgated in 1924 by the ILTF have remained largely stable in the ensuing 80 years, the one major change being the addition of the tiebreak system designed by Jimmy Van Alen.[43] That same year, tennis withdrew from the Olympics after the 1924 Games, but returned 60 years later as a 21-and-under demonstration event in 1984. This reinstatement was credited by the efforts of then ITF president Philippe Chatrier, ITF general secretary David Gray and ITF vice president Pablo Llorens, with support from International Olympic Committee president Juan Antonio Samaranch. The success of the event was overwhelming, and the IOC decided to reintroduce tennis as a full-medal sport at Seoul in 1988.[44][45]

The Davis Cup, an annual competition between men's national teams, dates to 1900.[46] The analogous competition for women's national teams, the Fed Cup, was founded as the Federation Cup in 1963 to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the founding of the ITF.[47]

In 1926, promoter C. C. Pyle established the first professional tennis tour with a group of American and French tennis players playing exhibition matches to paying audiences.[38][48] The most notable of these early professionals were the American Vinnie Richards and the Frenchwoman Suzanne Lenglen.[38][49] Players turned pro would no longer be permitted to compete in the major (amateur) tournaments.[38]

In 1968, commercial pressures and rumours of some amateurs taking money under the table led to the abandonment of this distinction, inaugurating the Open Era, in which all players could compete in all tournaments, and top players were able to make their living from tennis.[50] With the beginning of the Open Era, the establishment of an international professional tennis circuit, and revenues from the sale of television rights, tennis's popularity has spread worldwide, and the sport has shed its middle-class English-speaking image[51] (although it is acknowledged that this stereotype still exists).[51][52]

In 1954, Van Alen founded the International Tennis Hall of Fame, a nonprofit museum in Newport, Rhode Island.[53] The building contains a large collection of tennis memorabilia as well as a hall of fame honouring prominent members and tennis players from all over the world.[54]

Equipment

Part of the appeal of tennis stems from the simplicity of equipment required for play. Beginners need only a racket and balls.[1]

Rackets

The components of a tennis racket include a handle, known as the grip, connected to a neck which joins a roughly elliptical frame that holds a matrix of tightly pulled strings. For the first 100 years of the modern game, rackets were made of wood and of standard size, and strings were of animal gut. Laminated wood construction yielded more strength in rackets used through most of the 20th century until first metal and then composites of carbon graphite, ceramics, and lighter metals such as titanium were introduced. These stronger materials enabled the production of oversized rackets that yielded yet more power. Meanwhile, technology led to the use of synthetic strings that match the feel of gut yet with added durability.

Under modern rules of tennis, the rackets must adhere to the following guidelines;[55]

The hitting area, composed of the strings, must be flat and generally uniform.
The frame of the hitting area may not be more than 29 inches (74 cm) in length and 12.5 inches (32 cm) in width.
The entire racket must be of a fixed shape, size, weight, and weight distribution. There may not be any energy source built into the rackets.
The rackets must not provide any kind of communication, instruction or advice to the player during the match.

The rules regarding rackets have changed over time, as material and engineering advances have been made. For example, the maximum length of the frame had been 32 inches (81 cm) until 1997, when it was shortened to 29 inches (74 cm).[56]

Many companies manufacture and distribute tennis rackets. Wilson, Head and Babolat are three of the most commonly used brands; however, many more companies exist.[57] The same companies sponsor players to use these rackets in the hopes that the company name will become better known by the public.

Strings

There are multiple types of tennis strings, including natural gut and synthetic stings made from materials such as nylon, kevlar, or polyester.[58]

The first type of tennis strings available were natural gut strings, introduced by Babolat. They were the only type used until synthetic strings were introduced in the 1950s. Natural gut strings are still used frequently by players such as Roger Federer. They are made from cow intestines, and provide increased power, and are easier on the arm than most strings.[59]

Most synthetic strings are made from monofilament or multifiliament nylon strings. Monofilament strings are cheap to buy, and are used widely by many recreational level players for their all round performance, while multifilament strings are created to mimic natural gut more closely by weaving together fibres, but are generally more expensive than their monofilament counterparts.[58] Polyester strings allow for more spin on the ball than any other string, due to their firm strings, while keeping control of the ball, and this is why many players use them, especially higher player ones.[60] Kevlar tennis strings are highly durable, and are mostly used by players that frequently break strings, because they maintain tension well, but these strings can be stiff on the arm.[61]

Hybrid stringing is when a tennis racket is strung with two different strings for the mains (the vertical strings) and the crosses (the horizontal strings). This is most commonly done with two different strings that are made of different materials, but can also be done with two different types of the same string. A notable example of a player using hybrid strings is Roger Federer, using natural gut strings in his mains and polyester strings in his crosses.[62]

Balls

Tennis balls were originally made of cloth strips stitched together with thread and stuffed with feathers.[63] Modern tennis balls are made of hollow vulcanized rubber with a felt coating. Traditionally white, the predominant colour was gradually changed to optic yellow in the latter part of the 20th century to allow for improved visibility. Tennis balls must conform to certain criteria for size, weight, deformation, and bounce to be approved for regulation play. The International Tennis Federation (ITF) defines the official diameter as 65.41–68.58 mm (2.575–2.700 in). Balls must weigh between 56.0 and 59.4 g (1.98 and 2.10 oz).[64] Tennis balls were traditionally manufactured in the United States and Europe. Although the process of producing the balls has remained virtually unchanged for the past 100 years, the majority of manufacturing now takes place in the Far East. The relocation is due to cheaper labour costs and materials in the region.[65] Tournaments that are played under the ITF Rules of Tennis must use balls that are approved by the International Tennis Federation (ITF) and be named on the official ITF list of approved tennis balls.[66]

Manner of play

Court

Tennis is played on a rectangular, flat surface. The court is 78 feet (23.77 m) long, and 27 feet (8.2 m) wide for singles matches and 36 ft (11 m) for doubles matches.[67] Additional clear space around the court is required in order for players to reach overrun balls. A net is stretched across the full width of the court, parallel with the baselines, dividing it into two equal ends. It is held up by either a cord or metal cable of diameter no greater than 0.8 cm (1⁄3 in).[66] The net is 3 feet 6 inches (1.07 m) high at the posts and 3 feet (0.91 m) high in the centre.[67] The net posts are 3 feet (0.91 m) outside the doubles court on each side or, for a singles net, 3 feet (0.91 m) outside the singles court on each side.

The modern tennis court owes its design to Major Walter Clopton Wingfield. In 1873, Wingfield patented a court much the same as the current one for his stické tennis (sphairistike). This template was modified in 1875 to the court design that exists today, with markings similar to Wingfield's version, but with the hourglass shape of his court changed to a rectangle.[68]

Tennis is unusual in that it is played on a variety of surfaces.[69] Grass, clay, and hard courts of concrete or asphalt topped with acrylic are the most common. Occasionally carpet is used for indoor play, with hardwood flooring having been historically used. Artificial turf courts can also be found.

The lines that delineate the width of the court are called the baseline (farthest back) and the service line (middle of the court). The short mark in the centre of each baseline is referred to as either the hash mark or the centre mark. The outermost lines that make up the length are called the doubles sidelines; they are the boundaries for doubles matches. The lines to the inside of the doubles sidelines are the singles sidelines, and are the boundaries in singles play. The area between a doubles sideline and the nearest singles sideline is called the doubles alley, playable in doubles play. The line that runs across the centre of a player's side of the court is called the service line because the serve must be delivered into the area between the service line and the net on the receiving side. Despite its name, this is not where a player legally stands when making a serve.[70]

The line dividing the service line in two is called the centre line or centre service line. The boxes this centre line creates are called the service boxes; depending on a player's position, they have to hit the ball into one of these when serving.[71] A ball is out only if none of it has hit the area inside the lines, or the line, upon its first bounce. All lines are required to be between 1 and 2 inches (25 and 51 mm) in width, with the exception of the baseline which can be up to 4 inches (100 mm) wide, although in practice it is often the same width as the others.[70]

Play of a single point

The players or teams start on opposite sides of the net. One player is designated the server, and the opposing player is the receiver. The choice to be server or receiver in the first game and the choice of ends is decided by a coin toss before the warm-up starts. Service alternates game by game between the two players or teams. For each point, the server starts behind the baseline, between the centre mark and the sideline. The receiver may start anywhere on their side of the net. When the receiver is ready, the server will serve, although the receiver must play to the pace of the server.

For a service to be legal, the ball must travel over the net without touching it into the diagonally opposite service box. If the ball hits the net but lands in the service box, this is a let or net service, which is void, and the server retakes that serve. The player can serve any number of let services in a point and they are always treated as voids and not as faults. A fault is a serve that falls long or wide of the service box, or does not clear the net. There is also a "foot fault" when a player's foot touches the baseline or an extension of the centre mark before the ball is hit. If the second service, after a fault, is also a fault, the server double faults, and the receiver wins the point. However, if the serve is in, it is considered a legal service.

A legal service starts a rally, in which the players alternate hitting the ball across the net. A legal return consists of a player hitting the ball so that it falls in the server's court, before it has bounced twice or hit any fixtures except the net. A player or team cannot hit the ball twice in a row. The ball must travel over or round the net into the other players' court. A ball that hits the net during a rally is considered a legal return as long as it crosses into the opposite side of the court. The first player or team to fail to make a legal return loses the point. The server then moves to the other side of the service line at the start of a new point.[72]

Scoring

A game consists of a sequence of points played with the same player serving. A game is won by the first player to have won at least four points in total and at least two points more than the opponent. The running score of each game is described in a manner peculiar to tennis: scores from zero to three points are described as "love", "15", "30", and "40", respectively. If at least three points have been scored by each player, making the player's scores equal at 40 apiece, the score is not called out as "40–40", but rather as "deuce". If at least three points have been scored by each side and a player has one more point than his opponent, the score of the game is "advantage" for the player in the lead. During informal games, advantage can also be called "ad in" or "van in" when the serving player is ahead, and "ad out" or "van out" when the receiving player is ahead; alternatively, either player may simply call out "my ad" or "your ad".

The score of a tennis game during play is always read with the serving player's score first. In tournament play, the chair umpire calls the point count (e.g., "15–love") after each point. At the end of a game, the chair umpire also announces the winner of the game and the overall score.[73]

A set consists of a sequence of games played with service alternating between games, ending when the count of games won meets certain criteria. Typically, a player wins a set by winning at least six games and at least two games more than the opponent. If one player has won six games and the opponent five, an additional game is played. If the leading player wins that game, the player wins the set 7–5. If the trailing player wins the game (tying the set 6–6) a tiebreak is played. A tiebreak, played under a separate set of rules, allows one player to win one more game and thus the set, to give a final set score of 7–6. A tiebreak game can be won by scoring at least seven points and at least two points more than the opponent. In a tiebreak, two players serve by 'ABBA' system which has been proven to be fair.[74] If a tiebreak is not played, the set is referred to as an advantage set, where the set continues without limit until one player leads by a two-game margin. A "love set" means that the loser of the set won zero games, colloquially termed a "jam donut" in the US.[75] In tournament play, the chair umpire announces the winner of the set and the overall score. The final score in sets is always read with the winning player's score first, e.g. "6–2, 4–6, 6–0, 7–5".

A match consists of a sequence of sets. The outcome is determined through a best of three or five sets system. On the professional circuit, men play best-of-five-set matches at all four Grand Slam tournaments, Davis Cup, and the final of the Olympic Games and best-of-three-set matches at all other tournaments, while women play best-of-three-set matches at all tournaments. The first player to win two sets in a best-of-three, or three sets in a best-of-five, wins the match.[76] Only in the final sets of matches at the Olympic Games and Fed Cup are tiebreaks not played. In these cases, sets are played indefinitely until one player has a two-game lead, occasionally leading to some remarkably long matches.

In tournament play, the chair umpire announces the end of the match with the well-known phrase "Game, set, match" followed by the winning person's or team's name.

A game point occurs in tennis whenever the player who is in the lead in the game needs only one more point to win the game. The terminology is extended to sets (set point), matches (match point), and even championships (championship point). For example, if the player who is serving has a score of 40–love, the player has a triple game point (triple set point, etc.) as the player has three consecutive chances to win the game. Game points, set points, and match points are not part of official scoring and are not announced by the chair umpire in tournament play.

A break point occurs if the receiver, not the server, has a chance to win the game with the next point. Break points are of particular importance because serving is generally considered advantageous, with servers being expected to win games in which they are serving. A receiver who has one (score of 30–40 or advantage), two (score of 15–40) or three (score of love–40) consecutive chances to win the game has break point, double break point or triple break point, respectively. If the receiver does, in fact, win their break point, the game is awarded to the receiver, and the receiver is said to have converted their break point. If the receiver fails to win their break point it is called a failure to convert. Winning break points, and thus the game, is also referred to as breaking serve, as the receiver has disrupted, or broken the natural advantage of the server. If in the following game the previous server also wins a break point it is referred to as breaking back. Except where tiebreaks apply, at least one break of serve is required to win a set (otherwise a two-game lead would never occur).

Rule variations

No ad

Pro set

Match tiebreak

Fast4

Another, however informal, tennis format is called Canadian doubles. This involves three players, with one person playing against a doubles team. The single player gets to utilize the alleys normally reserved only for a doubles team. Conversely, the doubles team does not use the alleys when executing a shot. The scoring is the same as for a regular game. This format is not sanctioned by any official body.

"Australian doubles", another informal and unsanctioned form of tennis, is played with similar rules to the Canadian doubles style, only in this version, players rotate court position after each game, each player taking a turn at playing alone against the other two. As such, each player plays doubles and singles over the course of a match, with the singles player always serving. Scoring styles vary, but one popular method is to assign a value of 2 points to each game, with the server taking both points if he or she holds serve and the doubles team each taking one if they break serve.

Wheelchair tennis can be played by able-bodied players as well as people who require a wheelchair for mobility. An extra bounce is permitted. This rule makes it possible to have mixed wheelchair and able-bodied matches. It is possible for a doubles team to consist of a wheelchair player and an able-bodied player (referred to as "one-up, one-down"), or for a wheelchair player to play against an able-bodied player. In such cases, the extra bounce is permitted for the wheelchair users only.

Match play

Continuity

A tennis match is intended to be continuous.[81] Because stamina is a relevant factor, arbitrary delays are not permitted. In most cases, service is required to occur no more than 20 seconds after the end of the previous point.[81] This is increased to 90 seconds when the players change ends (after every odd-numbered game), and a 2-minute break is permitted between sets.[81] Other than this, breaks are permitted only when forced by events beyond the players' control, such as rain, damaged footwear, damaged racket, or the need to retrieve an errant ball. Should a player be deemed to be stalling repeatedly, the chair umpire may initially give a warning followed by subsequent penalties of "point", "game", and default of the match for the player who is consistently taking longer than the allowed time limit.[82]

In the event of a rain delay, darkness or other external conditions halting play, the match is resumed at a later time, with the same score as at the time of the delay, and each player at the same end of the court as when rain halted play, or as close to the same relative compass point if play is resumed on a different court.

Ball changes

Balls wear out quickly in serious play and, therefore, in ATP and WTA tournaments, they are changed after every nine games with the first change occurring after only seven games, because the first set of balls is also used for the pre-match warm-up.[64] In ITF tournaments like Fed Cup, the balls are changed after every eleven games (rather than nine) with the first change occurring after only nine games (instead of seven). An exception is that a ball change may not take place at the beginning of a tiebreaker, in which case the ball change is delayed until the beginning of the second game of the next set.[66] As a courtesy to the receiver, the server will often signal to the receiver before the first serve of the game in which new balls are used as a reminder that they are using new balls. Continuity of the balls' condition is considered part of the game, so if a re-warm-up is required after an extended break in play (usually due to rain), then the re-warm-up is done using a separate set of balls, and use of the match balls is resumed only when play resumes.

On-court coaching

A recent rule change is to allow coaching on court on a limited basis during a match.[83][84][85][86] This has been introduced in women's tennis for WTA Tour events in 2009 and allows the player to request her coach once per set.[87]

Stance

Stance refers to the way a player prepares themselves in order to best be able to return a shot. Essentially, it enables them to move quickly in order to achieve a particular stroke. There are four main stances in modern tennis: open, semi-open, closed, and neutral. All four stances involve the player crouching in some manner: as well as being a more efficient striking posture, it allows them to isometrically preload their muscles in order to play the stroke more dynamically. What stance is selected is strongly influenced by shot selection. A player may quickly alter their stance depending on the circumstances and the type of shot they intend to play. Any given stance also alters dramatically based upon the actual playing of the shot with dynamic movements and shifts of body weight occurring.[88][89]

Open stance

This is the most common stance in tennis. The player's feet are placed parallel to the net. They may be pointing sideways, directly at the net or diagonally towards it. This stance allows for a high degree of torso rotation which can add significant power to the stroke. This process is sometimes likened to the coiling and uncoiling of a spring. i.e. the torso is rotated as a means of preloading the muscular system in preparation for playing the stroke: this is the coiling phase. When the stroke is played the torso rotates to face forwards again, called uncoiling, and adds significant power to the stroke. A disadvantage of this stance is that it does not always allow 'for proper weight transfer and maintenance of balance'[88] when making powerful strokes. It is commonly used for forehand strokes; double-handed backhands can also be made effectively from it.

Semi-open stance

This stance is somewhere between open and closed and is a very flexible stance. The feet are aligned diagonally towards the net. It allows for a lot of shoulder rotation and the torso can be coiled, before being uncoiled into the shot in order to increase the power of the shot. It is commonly used in modern tennis especially by 'top professional players on the forehand'.[88] Two-handed backhands can also be employed from this stance.

Closed stance

The closed stance is the least commonly used of the three main stances. One foot is placed further towards the net with the other foot further from it; there is a diagonal alignment between the feet. It allows for effective torso rotation in order to increase the power of the shot. It is usually used to play backhand shots and it is rare to see forehand shots played from it. A stroke from this stance may entail the rear foot coming completely off the floor with bodyweight being transferred entirely to the front foot.[88]
[89]

Neutral stance

This is sometimes also referred to as the square stance. One foot is positioned closer to the net and ahead of the other which is behind and in line with it. Both feet are aligned at a 90 degree angle to the net. The neutral stance is often taught early because 'It allows beginners to learn about shifting weight and rotation of the body.'[89] Forehands and backhands may be made from it.[90]

Shots

Competent tennis players have eight basic shots in their repertoire: the serve, forehand, backhand, volley, half-volley, overhead smash, drop shot, and lob.

Grip

A grip is a way of holding the racket in order to hit shots during a match. The grip affects the angle of the racket face when it hits the ball and influences the pace, spin, and placement of the shot. Players use various grips during play, including the Continental (The "Handshake Grip"), Eastern (either semi-eastern or full eastern, usually used for backhands), and Western (semi-western or full western, usually for forehand grips) grips. Most players change grips during a match depending on what shot they are hitting; for example, slice shots and serves call for a Continental grip.[91]

Serve

A serve (or, more formally, a "service") in tennis is a shot to start a point. The serve is initiated by tossing the ball into the air and hitting it (usually near the apex of its trajectory) into the diagonally opposite service box without touching the net. The serve may be hit under- or overhand although underhand serving remains a rarity.[92] If the ball hits the net on the first serve and bounces over into the correct diagonal box then it is called a "let" and the server gets two more additional serves to get it in. There can also be a let if the server serves the ball and the receiver isn't prepared.[66] If the server misses his or her first serve and gets a let on the second serve, then they get one more try to get the serve in the box.

Experienced players strive to master the conventional overhand serve to maximize its power and placement. The server may employ different types of serve including flat serve, topspin serve, slice serve, and kick (American twist) serve. A reverse type of spin serve is hit in a manner that spins the ball opposite the natural spin of the server, the spin direction depending upon right- or left-handedness. If the ball is spinning counterclockwise, it will curve right from the hitter's point of view and curve left if spinning clockwise.[93]

Some servers are content to use the serve simply to initiate the point; however, advanced players often try to hit a winning shot with their serve. A winning serve that is not touched by the opponent is called an "ace".

Forehand

For a right-handed player, the forehand is a stroke that begins on the right side of the body, continues across the body as contact is made with the ball, and ends on the left side of the body. There are various grips for executing the forehand, and their popularity has fluctuated over the years. The most important ones are the continental, the eastern, the semi-western, and the western. For a number of years, the small, frail 1920s player Bill Johnston was considered by many to have had the best forehand of all time, a stroke that he hit shoulder-high using a western grip. Few top players used the western grip after the 1920s, but in the latter part of the 20th century, as shot-making techniques and equipment changed radically, the western forehand made a strong comeback and is now used by many modern players. No matter which grip is used, most forehands are generally executed with one hand holding the racket, but there have been fine players with two-handed forehands. In the 1940s and 50s, the Ecuadorian/American player Pancho Segura used a two-handed forehand to achieve a devastating effect against larger, more powerful players. Players such as Monica Seles or France's Fabrice Santoro and Marion Bartoli are also notable players known for their two-handed forehands.[94]

Backhand

For right-handed players, the backhand is a stroke that begins on the left side of their body, continues across their body as contact is made with the ball, and ends on the right side of their body. It can be executed with either one hand or with both and is generally considered more difficult to master than the forehand. For most of the 20th century, the backhand was performed with one hand, using either an eastern or a continental grip. The first notable players to use two hands were the 1930s Australians Vivian McGrath and John Bromwich, but they were lone exceptions. The two-handed grip gained popularity in the 1970s as Björn Borg, Chris Evert, Jimmy Connors, and later Mats Wilander and Marat Safin used it to great effect, and it is now used by a large number of the world's best players, including Novak Djokovic, Rafael Nadal and Serena Williams.[95]

Two hands give the player more control, while one hand can generate a slice shot, applying backspin on the ball to produce a low trajectory bounce. Reach is also limited with the two-handed shot. The player long considered to have had the best backhand of all time, Don Budge, had a powerful one-handed stroke in the 1930s and 1940s that imparted topspin onto the ball. Ken Rosewall, another player noted for his one-handed backhand, used a very accurate slice backhand through the 1950s and 1960s. A small number of players, notably Monica Seles, use two hands on both the backhand and forehand sides.

Other shots

A volley is a shot returned to the opponent in mid-air before the ball bounces, generally performed near the net, and is usually made with a stiff-wristed punching motion to hit the ball into an open area of the opponent's court. The half volley is made by hitting the ball on the rise just after it has bounced, also generally in the vicinity of the net, and played with the racket close to the ground.[96] The swinging volley is hit out of the air as the player approaches the net. It is an offensive shot used to take preparation time away from the opponent, as it returns the ball into the opponent's court much faster than a standard volley.

From a poor defensive position on the baseline, the lob can be used as either an offensive or defensive weapon, hitting the ball high and deep into the opponent's court to either enable the lobber to get into better defensive position or to win the point outright by hitting it over the opponent's head. If the lob is not hit deeply enough into the other court, however, an opponent near the net may then hit an overhead smash, a hard, serve-like shot, to try to end the point.

A difficult shot in tennis is the return of an attempted lob over the backhand side of a player. When the contact point is higher than the reach of a two-handed backhand, most players will try to execute a high slice (under the ball or sideways). Fewer players attempt the backhand sky-hook or smash. Rarely, a player will go for a high topspin backhand, while themselves in the air. A successful execution of any of these alternatives requires balance and timing, with less margin of error than the lower contact point backhands, since this shot is a break in the regular pattern of play.

If their opponent is deep in their court, a player may suddenly employ an unexpected drop shot, by softly tapping the ball just over the net so that the opponent is unable to run in fast enough to retrieve it. Advanced players will often apply back spin to a drop shot, causing the ball to "skid" upon landing and bounce sideways, with less forward momentum toward their opponent, or even backwards towards the net, thus making it even more difficult to return.

Tournaments

Tournaments are often organized by gender and number of players. Common tournament configurations include men's singles, women's singles, and doubles, where two players play on each side of the net. Tournaments may be organized for specific age groups, with upper age limits for youth and lower age limits for senior players. Example of this include the Orange Bowl and Les Petits As junior tournaments. There are also tournaments for players with disabilities, such as wheelchair tennis and deaf tennis.[97] In the four Grand Slam tournaments, the singles draws are limited to 128 players for each gender.

Most large tournaments seed players, but players may also be matched by their skill level. According to how well a person does in sanctioned play, a player is given a rating that is adjusted periodically to maintain competitive matches. For example, the United States Tennis Association administers the National Tennis Rating Program (NTRP), which rates players between 1.0 and 7.0 in 1/2 point increments. Average club players under this system would rate 3.0–4.5 while world class players would be 7.0 on this scale.

Grand Slam tournaments

The four Grand Slam tournaments are considered to be the most prestigious tennis events in the world. They are held annually and comprise, in chronological order, the Australian Open, the French Open, Wimbledon, and the US Open. Apart from the Olympic Games, Davis Cup, Fed Cup, and Hopman Cup, they are the only tournaments regulated by the International Tennis Federation (ITF).[98] The ITF's national associations, Tennis Australia (Australian Open), the Fédération Française de Tennis (French Open), the Lawn Tennis Association (Wimbledon) and the United States Tennis Association (US Open) are delegated the responsibility to organize these events.[98]

Aside from the historical significance of these events, they also carry larger prize funds than any other tour event and are worth double the number of ranking points to the champion than in the next echelon of tournaments, the ATP Masters 1000 (men) and Premier events (women).[99][100] Another distinguishing feature is the number of players in the singles draw. There are 128, more than any other professional tennis tournament. This draw is composed of 32 seeded players, other players ranked in the world's top 100, qualifiers, and players who receive invitations through wild cards. Grand Slam men's tournaments have best-of-five set matches while the women play best-of-three. Grand Slam tournaments are among the small number of events that last two weeks, the others being the Indian Wells Masters and the Miami Masters.

Currently, the Grand Slam tournaments are the only tour events that have mixed doubles contests. Grand Slam tournaments are held in conjunction with wheelchair tennis tournaments and junior tennis competitions. These tournaments also contain their own idiosyncrasies. For example, players at Wimbledon are required to wear predominantly white. Andre Agassi chose to skip Wimbledon from 1988 through 1990 citing the event's traditionalism, particularly its "predominantly white" dress code.[101] Wimbledon has its own particular methods for disseminating tickets, often leading tennis fans to follow complex procedures to obtain tickets.[102]

The French Open became an international tournament in 1925.

Men's tournament structure

The ATP Masters 1000 is a group of nine tournaments that form the second-highest echelon in men's tennis. Each event is held annually, and a win at one of these events is worth 1000 ranking points. When the ATP, led by Hamilton Jordan, began running the men's tour in 1990, the directors designated the top nine tournaments, outside of the Grand Slam events, as "Super 9" events.[103] In 2000 this became the Tennis Masters Series and in 2004 the ATP Masters Series. In November at the end of the tennis year, the world's top eight players compete in the ATP Finals, a tournament with a rotating locale. It is currently held in Turin.[104]

In August 2007 the ATP announced major changes to the tour that were introduced in 2009. The Masters Series was renamed to the "ATP Masters 1000", the addition of the number 1000 referring to the number of ranking points earned by the winner of each tournament. Contrary to earlier plans, the number of tournaments was not reduced from nine to eight and the Monte-Carlo Masters remains part of the series although, unlike the other events, it does not have a mandatory player commitment. The Hamburg Masters has been downgraded to a 500-point event. The Madrid Masters moved to May and onto clay courts, and a new tournament in Shanghai took over Madrid's former indoor October slot. As of 2011 six of the nine "1000" level tournaments are combined ATP and WTA events.[105]

The third and fourth tier of men's tennis tournaments are formed by the ATP 500 series, consisting of 11 tournaments, and the ATP 250 series with 40 tournaments.[106] Like the ATP Masters 1000, these events offer various amounts of prize money and the numbers refer to the number of ranking points earned by the winner of a tournament.[99] The Dubai Tennis Championships offer the largest financial incentive to players, with total prize money of US$2,313,975 (2012).[107] These series have various draws of 28, 32, 48 and 56 for singles and 16 and 24 for doubles. It is mandatory for leading players to enter at least four 500 events, including at least one after the US Open.

The Challenger Tour for men is the lowest level of tournament administered by the ATP. It is composed of about 150 events and, as a result, features a more diverse range of countries hosting events.[108] The majority of players use the Challenger Series at the beginning of their career to work their way up the rankings. Andre Agassi, between winning Grand Slam tournaments, plummeted to World No. 141 and used Challenger Series events for match experience and to progress back up the rankings.[109] The Challenger Series offers prize funds of between US$25,000 and US$150,000.

Below the Challenger Tour are the Futures tournaments, events on the ITF Men's Circuit. These tournaments also contribute towards a player's ATP rankings points. Futures Tournaments offer prize funds of between US$10,000 and US$15,000.[110] Approximately 530 Futures Tournaments are played each year.

Women's tournament structure

In 2021, the WTA rebranded, resembling the men's tournament series, and also providing extra simplicity for fans and consumers. The numbers do not indicate ranking points, or prize money, but is a system to help define different levels of women's tennis.

The WTA 1000 Tournaments (formerly the Premier Mandatory and Premier 5 Tournaments), are a series of seven tournaments that are part of the second-highest tier in women's tennis.[111][112]

The third and fourth tier of women's tennis tournaments are formed from the WTA 500 Series (formerly Premier 700), with fifteen tournaments, and the WTA 250 Series (formerly International), consisting of thirty tournaments.[111][113]

The WTA 125 Series (formerly 125K Series), is the lowest tier of women's tennis, with fourteen tournaments.[113]

Players

Professional players

Professional tennis players enjoy the same relative perks as most top sports personalities: clothing, equipment and endorsements. Like players of other individual sports such as golf, they are not salaried, but must play and finish highly in tournaments to obtain prize money.

In recent years,[when?] professional tennis players have been mocked by tabloids and fans for the involuntary or deliberate noise caused by players' grunting. This controversy has spurred the Grand Slam Committee, the International Tennis Association, and the Women's Tennis Association to teach players techniques to avoid grunting.[114]

While players are gradually less competitive in singles by their late 20s and early 30s, they can still continue competitively in doubles (as instanced by Martina Navratilova and John McEnroe, who won doubles titles in their 40s).

In the Open Era, several female players such as Martina Navratilova, Margaret Court, Martina Hingis, Serena Williams, and Venus Williams (the latter two sisters playing together) have been prolific at both singles and doubles events throughout their careers. John McEnroe is one of the very few professional male players to be top ranked in both singles and doubles at the same time,[115][116][117] and Yevgeny Kafelnikov is the most recent male player to win multiple Grand Slams in both singles and doubles during the same period of his career.

In terms of public attention and earnings (see below), singles champions have far surpassed their doubles counterparts. The Open Era, particularly the men's side, has seen many top-ranked singles players that only sparingly compete in doubles, while having "doubles specialists" who are typically being eliminated early in the singles draw but do well in the doubles portion of a tournament. Notable doubles pairings include The Woodies (Todd Woodbridge and Mark Woodforde) and the Bryan brothers (identical twin brothers Robert Charles "Bob" Bryan and Michael Carl "Mike" Bryan). Woodbridge has disliked the term "doubles 'specialists'", saying that he and Woodforde "set a singles schedule and doubles fitted in around that", although later in Woodbridge's career he focused exclusively on doubles as his singles ranking fell too low that it was no longer financially viable to recover at that age. Woodbridge noted that while top singles players earn enough that they do not need to nor want to play doubles, he suggested that lower-ranked singles players outside the Top Ten should play doubles to earn more playing time and money.[118][119]

The Olympics doubles tennis tournament necessitates that both members of a doubles pairing be from the same country, hence several top professional pairs such as Jamie Murray and Bruno Soares cannot compete in the Olympics. Top-ranked singles players that are usually rivals on the professional circuit, such as Boris Becker and Michael Stich, and Roger Federer and Stan Wawrinka have formed a rare doubles partnership for the Olympics. Unlike professional tennis tournaments (see below) where singles players receive much more prize money than doubles players, an Olympic medal for both singles and doubles has similar prestige. The Olympics is more of a priority for doubles champions while singles champions often skip the tournament.[118][119] While the ATP has voted for Olympic results to count towards player ranking points, WTA players voted against it.[120]

For the 2000 Olympics, Lisa Raymond was passed over for Team USA in favour of Serena Williams by captain Billie Jean King, even though Raymond was the top-ranked doubles player in the world at the time, and Raymond unsuccessfully challenged the selection.[120]

In professional tennis tournaments such as Wimbledon, the singles competition receives the most prize money and coverage, followed by doubles, and then mixed doubles usually receive the lowest monetary awards.[121] For instance in the US Open as of 2018, the men's and women's singles prize money (US$40,912,000) accounts for 80.9 percent of total player base compensation, while men's and women's doubles (US$6,140,840), men's and women's singles qualifying (US$3,008,000), and mixed doubles (US$505,000) account for 12.1 percent, 5.9 percent, and 1.0 percent, respectively. The singles winner receives US$3,800,000, while the doubles winning pair receives $700,000 and the mixed doubles winning pair receives US$155,000.[122]

Grand Slam tournament winners

The following players have won at least five singles titles at Grand Slam tournaments (active players in bold):

Greatest male players

A frequent topic of discussion among tennis fans and commentators is who was the greatest male singles player of all time. By a large margin, an Associated Press poll in 1950 named Bill Tilden as the greatest player of the first half of the 20th century.[123] From 1920 to 1930, Tilden won singles titles at Wimbledon three times and the US Championships seven times. In 1938, however, Donald Budge became the first person to win all four major singles titles during the same calendar year, the Grand Slam, and won six consecutive major titles in 1937 and 1938. Tilden called Budge "the finest player 365 days a year that ever lived."[124] In his 1979 autobiography, Jack Kramer said that, based on consistent play, Budge was the greatest player ever.[125] Some observers, however, also felt that Kramer deserved consideration for the title. Kramer was among the few who dominated amateur and professional tennis during the late 1940s and early 1950s. Tony Trabert has said that of the players he saw before the start of the Open Era, Kramer was the best male champion.[126]

By the 1960s, Budge and others had added Pancho Gonzales and Lew Hoad to the list of contenders. Budge reportedly believed that Gonzales was the greatest player ever.[127] Gonzales said about Hoad, "When Lew's game was at its peak nobody could touch him. ... I think his game was the best game ever. Better than mine. He was capable of making more shots than anybody. His two volleys were great. His overhead was enormous. He had the most natural tennis mind with the most natural tennis physique."[128]

Before and during the Open Era, Rod Laver remains the only male player in history to have won the calendar year Grand Slam twice in 1962 and 1969 [129] and also the calendar year Professional Grand Slam in 1967.[130]

Jimmy Connors, Björn Borg, and John McEnroe had a fierce rivalry in the late 1970s and early 1980s that propelled "the men's game to new heights of popularity".[131] Connors had a long and prolific career and holds the Open Era men's singles records of 109 titles including eight Grand Slams, 1,557 matches played, and 1,274 match wins. Borg was regarded by his contemporaries as among the greatest ever, having a calm court demeanor and unrivalled physical conditioning, winning six French Opens and five straight Wimbledon titles, retiring at age 26 when he was still in his prime. McEnroe attained the No. 1 ranking in both singles and doubles, finishing his career with 77 singles and 78 doubles titles; this remains the highest men's combined total of the Open Era.[132]

The Agassi–Sampras rivalry showcased the two best players in the 1990s.[133] Sampras had a precise and powerful serve while Agassi was considered to be one of the best service returners in the history of the game.[134][135][136] By the early 2000s, Pete Sampras had won a then-record of 14 Grand Slam titles which was by far the most among his contemporaries. Sampras also held the record for most weeks at No. 1 with 286 until it was broken a decade later by Federer and Djokovic after that. Andre Agassi, was the first player to complete the Career Grand Slam on all modern three surfaces (hard, grass, and clay courts) as previous winners of Grand Slam tournaments played in an era of grass and clay only (Rod Laver and Ken Rosewall also won major Pro tournaments on the three surfaces). Agassi also is the only player to win all four Grand Slam titles along with the year-end championships and the olympics. Both Sampras and Agassi are regarded to be among the greatest players of all time.[134][137][138]

By the early twenty-first century, the 'Big Three' of Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic have dominated men's singles tennis for two decades,[139][140] collectively winning 66 major singles tournaments; Djokovic with an all-time record 24 titles, Nadal with 22 and Federer with 20. They have been ranked as world No. 1s in singles for a total 947 weeks (equivalent to 18 years); Djokovic for a record 428 weeks, Federer for 310, and Nadal for 209.

Greatest female players

As with the men there are frequent discussions about who is the greatest female singles player of all time with Steffi Graf, Martina Navratilova and Serena Williams being the three players most often nominated.

In March 2012 the Tennis Channel published a combined list of the 100 greatest men and women tennis players of all time.[141] It ranked Steffi Graf as the greatest female player (in 3rd place overall), followed by Martina Navratilova (4th place) and Margaret Court (8th place). The rankings were determined by an international panel.

Sportswriter John Wertheim of Sports Illustrated stated in an article in July 2010 that Serena Williams is the greatest female tennis player ever with the argument that "Head-to-head, on a neutral surface (i.e. hard courts), everyone at their best, I can't help feeling that she crushes the other legends.".[142] In a reaction to this article Yahoo sports blog Busted Racket published a list of the top-10 women's tennis players of all time placing Martina Navratilova in first spot.[143] This top-10 list was similar to the one published in June 2008 by the Bleacher Report who also ranked Martina Navratilova as the top female player of all time.[144]

Steffi Graf is considered by some to be the greatest female player. Billie Jean King said in 1999, "Steffi is definitely the greatest women's tennis player of all time."[145] Martina Navratilova has included Graf on her list of great players.[145] In December 1999, Graf was named the greatest female tennis player of the 20th century by a panel of experts assembled by the Associated Press.[146] Tennis writer Steve Flink, in his book The Greatest Tennis Matches of the Twentieth Century, named her as the best female player of the 20th century, directly followed by Martina Navratilova.[147]

Tennis magazine selected Martina Navratilova as the greatest female tennis player for the years 1965 through 2005.[148][149] Tennis historian and journalist Bud Collins has called Navratilova "arguably, the greatest player of all time."[150] Billie Jean King said about Navratilova in 2006, "She's the greatest singles, doubles and mixed doubles player who's ever lived."[151]

In 2018, a Tennis.com panel selected Serena Williams as the greatest female tennis player in the Open Era.[152] In May 2020, the Tennis Channel ranked Williams as the greatest female tennis player of all time.[153]

In November 2018, Tennis.com polled its readers to choose the greatest women's tennis player of all time and Graf came in first.[154] In July 2020, The Guardian polled its readers to determine the greatest female tennis player of the past 50 years, and Graf was the clear favorite, picking up nearly twice as many votes as any other player.[155]

Officials

In most professional play and some amateur competition, there is an officiating head judge or chair umpire (usually referred to simply as the umpire), who sits in a raised chair to one side of the court. The umpire has absolute authority to make factual determinations. The umpire may be assisted by line judges, who determine whether the ball has landed within the required part of the court and who also call foot faults. There also may be a net judge who determines whether the ball has touched the net during service. The umpire has the right to overrule a line judge or a net judge if the umpire is sure that a clear mistake has been made.[156]

In past tournaments, line judges tasked with calling the serve were sometimes assisted by electronic sensors that beeped to indicate an out-of-bounds serve; one such system was called "Cyclops".[157] Cyclops has since largely been replaced by the Hawk-Eye system.[158][159] In professional tournaments using this system, players are allowed three unsuccessful appeals per set, plus one additional appeal in the tiebreak to challenge close line calls by means of an electronic review. The US Open, Miami Masters, US Open Series, and World Team Tennis started using this challenge system in 2006 and the Australian Open and Wimbledon introduced the system in 2007.[160] In clay-court matches, such as at the French Open, a call may be questioned by reference to the mark left by the ball's impact on the court surface.

The referee, who is usually located off the court, is the final authority about tennis rules. When called to the court by a player or team captain, the referee may overrule the umpire's decision if the tennis rules were violated (question of law) but may not change the umpire's decision on a question of fact. If, however, the referee is on the court during play, the referee may overrule the umpire's decision. (This would only happen in Davis Cup or Fed Cup matches, not at the World Group level, when a chair umpire from a non-neutral country is in the chair.)[156]

Junior tennis

In tennis, a junior is a player under 18 who is still legally protected by a parent or guardian. Players on the main adult tour who are under 18 must have documents signed by a parent or guardian. These players, however, are still eligible to play in junior tournaments.

The International Tennis Federation (ITF) conducts a junior tour that allows juniors to establish a world ranking and an Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) or Women's Tennis Association (WTA) ranking. Most juniors who enter the international circuit do so by progressing through ITF, Satellite, Future, and Challenger tournaments before entering the main circuit. The latter three circuits also have adults competing in them. Some juniors, however, such as Australian Lleyton Hewitt and Frenchman Gaël Monfils, have catapulted directly from the junior tour to the ATP tour by dominating the junior scene or by taking advantage of opportunities given to them to participate in professional tournaments.

In 2004, the ITF implemented a new rankings scheme to encourage greater participation in doubles, by combining two rankings (singles and doubles) into one combined tally.[161] Junior tournaments do not offer prize money except for the Grand Slam tournaments, which are the most prestigious junior events. Juniors may earn income from tennis by participating in the Future, Satellite, or Challenger tours. Tournaments are broken up into different tiers offering different amounts of ranking points, culminating with Grade A.

Leading juniors are allowed to participate for their nation in the Junior Fed Cup and Davis Cup competitions. To succeed in tennis often means having to begin playing at a young age. To facilitate and nurture a junior's growth in tennis, almost all tennis playing nations have developed a junior development system. Juniors develop their play through a range of tournaments on all surfaces, accommodating all different standards of play. Talented juniors may also receive sponsorships from governing bodies or private institutions.

Injuries

Muscle strain is one of the most common injuries in tennis.[162] When an isolated large-energy appears during the muscle contraction and at the same time body weight apply huge amount of pressure to the lengthened muscle, muscle strain can occur.[163] Inflammation and bleeding are triggered when muscle strain occurs, which can result in redness, pain and swelling.[163] Overuse is also common in tennis players of all levels. Muscle, cartilage, nerves, bursae, ligaments and tendons may be damaged from overuse. The repetitive use of a particular muscle without time for repair and recovery is the most common cause of injury.[163]

In popular culture

"Tennis balles" are mentioned by William Shakespeare in his play Henry V (1599), when a basket of them is given to King Henry as a mockery of his youth and playfulness.
David Foster Wallace, an amateur tennis player himself at Urbana High School in Illinois,[164] included tennis in many of his works of non-fiction and fiction including "Tennis Player Michael Joyce's Professional Artistry as a Paradigm of Certain Stuff about Choice, Freedom, Discipline, Joy, Grotesquerie, and Human Completeness", the autobiographical piece "Derivative Sport in Tornado Alley", and Infinite Jest, which is partially set at the fictional "Enfield Tennis Academy" in Massachusetts.
Japanese manga series The Prince of Tennis revolves around the tennis prodigy Echizen Ryoma and tennis matches between rival schools.
The Royal Tenenbaums (2001) is a film that features Richie Tenenbaum (Luke Wilson), a tennis pro who suffers from depression and has a breakdown on court in front of thousands of fans.[165]
Wimbledon (2004) is a film about a discouraged pro tennis player (Paul Bettany) who meets a young woman on the women's tennis circuit (Kirsten Dunst) who helps him find his drive to go and win Wimbledon.[166]
In The Squid and the Whale (2005), Joan (Laura Linney) has an affair with her kids' tennis coach, Ivan (William Baldwin). In a symbolic scene, Joan's ex-husband, Bernard (Jeff Daniels), loses a tennis match against Ivan in front of the kids.[167]
Woody Allen's Match Point (2005) features a love affair between a former tennis pro, Chris Wilton (Jonathan Rhys Meyers), and his best friend's fiancé, Nola Rice (Scarlett Johansson). A scene of the movie includes a brief comparison between Andre Agassi and Tim Henman, with Chris Wilton calling both of them "geniuses".[168]
Confetti (2006) is a mockumentary which sees three couples competing to win the title of "Most Original Wedding of the Year". One competing couple (Meredith MacNeill and Stephen Mangan) are a pair of hyper-competitive professional tennis players holding a tennis-themed wedding.[169]
There are several tennis video games including the Mario Tennis series, the TopSpin series, the Virtua Tennis series, Sega Superstars Tennis, Grand Slam Tennis and Wii Sports.[170][171]
Challengers, a 2024 film by director Luca Guadagnino, centers around a trio of tennis players, and their relationship with one another, romantic and otherwise. It was nominated four times at the 82nd Golden Globe Awards, where it won Best Original Score.[172]

See also

Tennis Sports Games

American handball
Outline of tennis
Tennis games
Tennis strategy
Tennis technology
Tennis statistics
Tennis injuries
International Tennis Integrity Agency

References

^ a b "Tennis Rules: How To Play Tennis | Rules of Sport". www.rulesofsport.com. Retrieved 25 November 2021.

^ "Tennis Rules". Pro Tennis Tips. 15 March 2015. Archived from the original on 25 November 2021. Retrieved 25 November 2021.

^ "Tennis | Rules, History, Prominent Players, & Facts | Britannica". Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Retrieved 13 March 2023.

^ William J. Baker (1988). "Sports in the Western World". p. 182. University of Illinois Press,

^ "Tennis | Rules, History, Prominent Players, & Facts | Britannica". Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Retrieved 25 November 2021.

^ "leg drive on the serve". Intuitive Tennis – Online Tennis Lessons, Video, and Blog. Archived from the original on 25 November 2021. Retrieved 25 November 2021.

^ Macdonald, Geoff (28 August 2011). "How the Serve Went Over the Top". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 25 November 2021.

^ "Tennis 360: tiebreaks explained". Tennis Australia. Retrieved 25 November 2021.

^ Maine, D'Arcy (25 May 2021). "US Open to use Hawk-Eye line-calling technology on all tennis courts for first time". ESPN. Retrieved 25 November 2021.

^ "Hawkeye Tennis Line-Calling System". www.topendsports.com. Retrieved 25 November 2021.

^ "PARTICIPATION INCREASES AS ITF PUBLISHES GLOBAL TENNIS REPORT 2021". ITF. 16 August 2021. Retrieved 25 November 2021.

^ "Grand Slam Tournaments". ITF. Retrieved 25 November 2021.

^ Gillmeister, Heiner (1998). Tennis : A Cultural History. Washington Square, N.Y.: New York University Press. p. 117. ISBN 0-8147-3121-X.

^ a b Newman, Paul B. (2001). Daily life in the Middle Ages. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-7864-0897-9.

^ a b Gillmeister, Heiner (1998). Tennis : A Cultural History (Repr. ed.). London: Leicester University Press. pp. 17–21. ISBN 978-0-7185-0195-2.

^ John Moyer Heathcote; C. G. Heathcote; Edward Oliver Pleydell-Bouverie; Arthur Campbell Ainger (1901). Tennis. Longmans, Green, and co. p. 14.

^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. 10 June 1927. Retrieved 15 May 2013.

^ Crego, Robert. Sports and Games of the 18th and 19th Centuries, page 115 (2003).

^ John Astley (1885), The Monumental Inscriptions in the Parish Church of S. Michael, Coventry, together with drawings of all the arms found therein, p. 21, Wikidata Q98360469

^ a b J. Perris
(2000) Grass tennis courts: how to construct and maintain them p.8. STRI, 2000

^ Australian Broadcasting Corporation's Radio National Ockham's Razor, first broadcast 6 June 2010.

^ Tyzack, Anna, The True Home of Tennis Archived 30 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine Country Life, 22 June 2005

^ "The Harry Gem Project". theharrygemproject.co.uk. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ "Leamington Tennis Club". Archived from the original on 27 August 2008. Retrieved 18 March 2008.

^ "Leamington Tennis Court Club". Archived from the original on 30 July 2018. Retrieved 30 July 2018.

^ E. M. Halliday. "Sphairistiké, Anyone?". American Heritage. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ Major Walter Clopton Wingfield International Tennis Hall of Fame. Retrieved 24 September 2011

^ a b "125 years of Wimbledon: From birth of lawn tennis to modern marvels" Archived 18 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine. CNN. Retrieved 21 September 2011

^ [Tennis: A Cultural History by Heiner Gillmeister]

^ Grimsley, Will (1971). Tennis: Its History, People and Events. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc. p. 9. ISBN 0-13-903377-7.

^ "Lawn-Tennis on Staten Island" (PDF). The New York Times. 4 September 1880. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 January 2021. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ [Heiner Gillmeister Tennis: A Cultural History]

^ "History of United States Tennis Association". Archived from the original on 30 October 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.

^ "Fact & History". Rhodes Island Government. Retrieved 29 May 2007.

^ "History of the U.S. National Championships/US Open". USOpen.org. Archived from the original on 3 June 2013. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ "History of the French Open". Archived from the original on 26 May 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.

^ "History of Tennis". International Tennis Federation. Archived from the original on 22 March 2010. Retrieved 28 July 2008.

^ a b c d "Australian Open Stats | History". 9 January 2021.

^ "Grand Slam Major Championships | Tennis". 4 February 2021.

^ a b c Bensen, Clark (2013–2014). "The World Championships of 1913 to 1923: the Forgotten Majors" (PDF). tenniscollectors.org. Newport, Rhode Island, United States: Journal of The Tennis Collectors of America. p. 470. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 5 September 2018. Number 30

^ "Tennis Federation Bans World Titles", The New York Times, 17 March 1923, p. 10

^ "ITF: History". ITF Tennis. London, United Kingdom: International Tennis Federation. 2018. Archived from the original on 13 July 2017. Retrieved 5 September 2018.

^ "James Henry Van Alen in the Tennis Hall of Fame". Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.

^ "Olympic Tennis Event". ITF. Archived from the original on 4 February 2016. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ "The Tennis and Olympics Love Affair". SportsPundit.com. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ "Davis Cup History". ITF. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ "Fed Cup History". ITF. Archived from the original on 2 November 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ "History of the Pro Tennis Wars Chapter 2, part 1 1927–1928". Retrieved 29 May 2007.

^ Open Minded Archived 31 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine – Bruce Goldman

^ "1968, Open era: The moment tennis opted to become a modern sport". Tennis Majors. 8 May 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2021.

^ a b Henderson, Jon (10 December 2008). "Middle-class heroes can lift our game". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2 August 2008.

^ Kate Magee (10 July 2008). "Max Clifford to help shed tennis' middle-class image". PR Week. Retrieved 2 August 2008.

^ "International Tennis Hall of Fame Information". Archived from the original on 18 May 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.

^ "International Tennis Hall of Fame". www.tennisfame.com. Retrieved 25 November 2021.

^ "ITF Tennis – Technical – Appendix II". ITF. Archived from the original on 13 April 2012. Retrieved 4 May 2012.

^ "ITF Tennis – Technical – The Racket". ITF. Archived from the original on 26 June 2012. Retrieved 4 May 2012.

^ "What are the most popular tennis racket brands". Retrieved 17 January 2021.

^ a b "Types of Tennis Strings | A Comprehensive Guide". tenniscompanion.org. 15 January 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2021.

^ "Natural Gut Strings – The Best Tennis Strings Available?". Perfect Tennis. 6 August 2019. Retrieved 23 November 2021.

^ "Pros and cons of polyester tennis strings". www.tennis-warehouse.com. Retrieved 23 November 2021.

^ "Ultimate Guide to Kevlar Strings". The Tennis Bros. Retrieved 23 November 2021.

^ "Hybrid Stringing – Roger Federer's Stringing Method of Choice". Perfect Tennis. 17 August 2019.

^ Grimsley, Will (1971). Tennis: Its History, People and Events: Styles of the Greats. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. p. 14. ISBN 0-13-903377-7.

^ a b "History of Rule 3 – The Ball". ITF. Archived from the original on 6 November 2015. Retrieved 1 May 2012.

^ "Balls- Manufacture". ITF. Archived from the original on 15 October 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2014.

^ a b c d "ITF Rules of Tennis" (PDF). International Tennis Federation. Retrieved 7 November 2022.

^ a b "Tennis court dimensions". Sportsknowhow.com. Archived from the original on 10 June 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.

^ "Tennis court history – Grass". ITF. Archived from the original on 30 June 2008. Retrieved 28 July 2008.

^ "Surface Descriptions". International Tennis Federation. Archived from the original on 2 May 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2015.

^ a b "ITF Rules of Tennis – Rule 1 (The Court)" (PDF). ITF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 April 2013. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ "ITF Rules of Tennis – Rule 17 (Serving)" (PDF). ITF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 April 2013. Retrieved 3 May 2012.

^ "Tennis Terminology". cbs.com. Retrieved 31 December 2011.

^ "Basic rules of tennis".

^ "Scientists say ABBA sequence would make for fairer penalty shootouts in soccer". UPI. 28 July 2017. Retrieved 26 September 2021.

^ "ATP Most Jam Donuts Served". Tennis.com. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ From 1984 through 1998, women played first-to-win-three-sets in the final of the year-ending WTA Tour Championships.

^ "WTT Firsts & Innovations". WTT.com. Archived from the original on 25 February 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.

^ "Alternative Procedures and Scoring Methods". ITF. Archived from the original on 6 February 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.

^ "2017 Australian Ranking Tournaments – FAST4 scoring format" (PDF). Tennis Australia. March 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2021.

^ "Fast4 Tennis: What is it, what are the rules and how is it played?". Fox Sports. 11 January 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2021.

^ a b c "The ITF states this in Rule No. 29" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 September 2008. Retrieved 28 January 2008.

^ "Code of Conduct for 2012 ITF Pro Circuits Tournaments" (PDF). ITF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 7 May 2012. The first violation of this Section shall be penalised by a Time Violation warning and each subsequent violation shall be penalised by the assessment of one Time Violation point penalty.

^ "Tennis On-Court Coaching". Expert-tennis-tips.com.

^ "Coaching during a match". USTA. Archived from the original on 5 May 2010. Retrieved 7 May 2012.

^ "Tennis Coaching Debate". NPR.org. NPR. Retrieved 7 May 2012.

^ "Does on-court coaching have a future?". ESPN. 10 October 2006. Retrieved 7 May 2012.

^ WTA 2012 Official Rulebook Archived 10 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine Chapter XVII/H

^ a b c d "Tennis Stances". Archived from the original on 15 October 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2019.

^ a b c "Tennis Techniques for Beginners". Archived from the original on 15 October 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2019.

^ "Tennis Footwork: Different Hitting Stances Explained". 27 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 October 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2019.

^ "Grip Guide — A Grip on Your Game". Tennis.com. Retrieved 3 May 2012.

^ "Chang refused to lose 20 years ago". ESPN. 19 May 2009. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ "Serves". BBC. 12 September 2005. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ "The Two-handed Forehand Revisited". TennisONE. Archived from the original on 11 May 2012. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ Damir Popadic. "Two-Handed is Superior to One-Handed Backhand" (PDF). ITF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ Grasso, John (2011). Historical Dictionary of Tennis. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-8108-7237-0.

^ "Lawn Tennis Association Deaf tennis". Archived from the original on 5 February 2008. Retrieved 16 March 2008.

^ a b "Grand Slams Overview". ITF. Archived from the original on 9 July 2013. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ a b "ATP Rankings FAQ". ATP. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ "WTA Tour Rankings" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2008. Retrieved 16 March 2008.

^ Sarah Holt (15 June 2005). "What not to wear at Wimbledon". BBC Sport. Retrieved 16 March 2008.

^ "10 Ways to Grab a Seat at Wimbledon 2010". Wimbledondebentureholders.com. Archived from the original on 15 June 2010. Retrieved 24 May 2010.

^ "History of Tennis". Archived from the original on 22 March 2010. Retrieved 16 March 2008.

^ "ATP Finals move to Turin from 2021 signals the end of an era". The Guardian. Retrieved 1 January 2024.

^ "ATP Tour 2009". Coretennis.net. Retrieved 24 May 2010.

^ "ATP World Tour Season". ATP. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ "Dubai Duty Free Tennis Championships". ATP. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ "About the Challenger Circuit". Association of Tennis Professionals. Archived from the original on 27 February 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2012.

^ "An appreciation of Andre Agassi". ESPN, Matt Wilansky. 1 July 2006. Retrieved 18 March 2008.

^ "About the ITF Men's Circuit". International Tennis Federation. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 18 March 2008.

^ a b "WTA unveils comprehensive rebrand". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 24 November 2021.

^ "WTA 1000 roundtable: Most impressive winners, top matches and best quotes". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 24 November 2021.

^ a b "Tournaments | WTA Official". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 24 November 2021.

^ "Women's tennis battles 'grunt work'". ESPN.com. 27 June 2012. Retrieved 24 July 2021.

^ Rubinstein, Julian (30 January 2000). "Being John McEnroe". The New York Times Magazine. Archived from the original on 6 July 2010. Retrieved 9 February 2018.

^ "John McEnroe". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 28 October 2013.

^ Cronin, Matthew (10 March 2011). Epic: John McEnroe, Bjorn Borg, and the Greatest Tennis Season Ever. Wiley. p. 144. ISBN 978-1-118-01595-7.

^ a b "Doubles specialists face unusual pressure, atmosphere in Olympic tennis". Tennis.com.

^ a b "Woodbridge: Doubles 'specialists' or tennis players?". Tennismash. 14 March 2017.

^ a b "Raymond Is Taking Issue With a Doubles Standard". Los Angeles Times. 6 August 2000.

^ "Wimbledon Prize Money". Associated Press. Retrieved 29 June 2011.[permanent dead link]

^ "2018 US Open Prize Money". United States Tennis Association. Retrieved 29 August 2018.

^ "ESPN.com: Tilden brought theatrics to tennis". www.espn.com.

^ "Don Budge's Comments After 1937 Davis Cup Semi-final Match Against Baron Gottfried von Cramm (1:07)". Archived from the original on 26 April 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.

^ Kramer, Jack; Deford, Frank (1979). The Game, My 40 Years in Tennis. Putnam. ISBN 0-399-12336-9.

^ Richard Pagliaro (26 February 2004). "The Tennis Week Interview: Tony Trabert Part II". Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2007.

^ Will Grimsley, Tennis: Its History, People, and Events (1971)

^ "Hoad" (PDF). Jame Buddell. Archived from the original on 25 June 2008. Retrieved 28 June 2012.

^ Sclink, Leo (20 January 2012). "Rod Laver's priceless Grand Slam". Herald Sun. Australia. Retrieved 5 September 2018.

^ Bercow, John (2014). "Chapter 9: Rod Laver". Tennis Maestros: The Twenty Greatest Male Tennis Players of All Time. London, England: Biteback Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84954-765-9.

^ "How Borg, Connors, Gerulaitis & McEnroe stirred masses and moved poets".

^ "Street-fighter recalls battles of old". 27 June 2004.

^ Dwyre, Bill (14 March 1995). "Sampras, Agassi Have Just Begun to Fight". The Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 15 May 2010.

^ a b Molinaro, John. "CBC Sports: "Tennis's love affair with Agassi comes to an end"". Cbc.ca. Archived from the original on 8 March 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2013.

^ "Reed's shotmakers: Men's return of serve". Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved 15 May 2010.

^ "Adjectives Tangled in the Net". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 May 2010.

^ Parsons, John (26 June 2002). "Grand-slammed". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ "Stars pay tribute to Agassi". BBC Sport. 4 September 2006. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ Eccleshare, Charlie (27 August 2018). "Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic head to US Open with 'Big Three' more dominant than ever". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2020.

^ Chase, Chris (21 August 2018). "Federer, Nadal and Djokovic: Ranking the Big Three rivalries". USA Today. Retrieved 19 February 2020.

^ "100 Greatest of All Time". The Tennis Channel. Archived from the original on 5 June 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.

^ Wertheim, John (7 July 2010). "I said it: Serena Williams is game's greatest ever". SI.com. Archived from the original on 24 August 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.

^ "Ranking the top-10 women's tennis players of all time". Yahoo Sports. Yahoo. Retrieved 3 May 2012.[permanent dead link]

^ "Greatest Ever: Tennis: The Top Ten Female Players of All Time". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 3 May 2012.

^ a b Finn, Robin (18 August 1999). "On Tennis; Graf Is Best, Right? Just Don't Ask Her". The New York Times. Retrieved 3 May 2012.

^ Wilstein, Steve (7 December 1999). "Tennis Players of the Century". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 27 May 2022. Retrieved 3 May 2012.

^ "Exclusive Interview with Steve Flink about the career of Chris Evert". Retrieved 3 May 2012.

^ "40 Greatest Players of the Tennis Era". Tennis. Archived from the original on 26 February 2009. Retrieved 4 May 2012.

^ "Redemption Has to Start Somewhere". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 2 March 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.

^ Collins, Bud (2008). The Bud Collins History of Tennis: An Authoritative Encyclopedia and Record Book. New York, N.Y.: New Chapter Press. p. 600. ISBN 978-0-942257-41-0.

^ Bonnie DeSimone (11 September 2006). "Act II of Navratilova's career ends with a win". ESPN. Retrieved 4 May 2012.

^ Tignor, Steve (2 March 2018). "The 50 Greatest Players of the Open Era (W): No. 1, Serena Williams". Tennis.com. Retrieved 17 June 2021.

^ Prakash (18 May 2020). "Serena Williams Ranked as the Greatest of All Time". Tennis World USA. Retrieved 17 June 2021.

^ "GOAT Vote: Steffi or Serena? 'The Ten' went one way; you went another". Tennis.com.

^ "The greatest female tennis player of the last 50 years: The fans' verdict". TheGuardian.com. 4 July 2020.

^ a b "ITF Rules of Tennis – Appendix V (Role of Court Officials)" (PDF). ITF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 April 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2012.

^ "Cyclops and speed guns". BBC. 20 June 2003. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ "Cyclops knocked off centre as Wimbledon adopts Hawkeye". The Guardian. London. 24 April 2007. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ Evans, Richard (27 June 2009). "Hawk-eye Vision". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ "The History Of Hawk-Eye". WTA Tour. 7 October 2011. Archived from the original on 24 November 2012. Retrieved 6 September 2012.

^ "ITF Announce Combined Junior Rankings" (PDF). ITF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 January 2004. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ Abrams, Geoffrey D.; Renstrom, Per A.; Safran, Marc R. (1 June 2012). "Epidemiology of musculoskeletal injury in the tennis player". British Journal of Sports Medicine. 46 (7): 492–498. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2012-091164. ISSN 1473-0480. PMID 22554841. S2CID 10416294.

^ a b c Levangie, P. K., & Norkin, C. C. (2011). Joint structure and function: A comprehensive analysis (5th ed.). Philadelphia: F.A. Davis Co. ISBN 9780803623620.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ "Brief Interview with a Five Draft Man". Amherst Magazine. Archived from the original on 30 December 2011. Retrieved 28 June 2009.

^ "The Royal Tenenbaums". IMDB.com. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ "Wimbledon". IMDB.com. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ "The Squid and the Whale". IMDB.com. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ "Match Point". IMDB.com. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ "Confetti". IMDB.com. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ "Topspin 4 Official Website". 2K Sports. Archived from the original on 5 May 2012. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

^ "Mario Tennis official website". Nintendo. Archived from the original on 12 May 2012. Retrieved 7 May 2012.

^ BBFC. "Challengers". www.bbfc.co.uk. Retrieved 20 March 2025.

Further reading

Barrett, John. Wimbledon: The Official History of the Championships (HarperCollins, 2001) ISBN 978-0-00-711707-9
Collins, Bud. History of Tennis – An Authoritative Encyclopedia and Record Book (New Chapter Press, 2010) ISBN 978-0-942257-70-0
Danzig, Allison and Peter Schwed (ed.). The Fireside Book of Tennis (Simon & Schuster, 1972) ISBN 978-0-671-21128-8
Doherty, Reginald Frank. R.F. and H.L. Doherty – On Lawn Tennis (Kessinger Publishing, 2010) ISBN 978-1-167-08589-5
Dwight, Eleanor. Tie Breaker – Jimmy Van Alen and Tennis in the 20th century (Scala Books, 2010) ISBN 978-1-905377-40-4
Gillmeister, Heiner. Tennis: A Cultural History (Continuum, 1998) ISBN 978-0-7185-0195-2
Grimsley, Will. Tennis – Its History, People and Events (Prentice-Hall, 1971) ISBN 0-13-903377-7
King, Billie Jean and Starr, Cynthia. We Have Come a Long Way (McGraw-Hill, 1998) ISBN 0-07-034625-9
Whitman, Malcolm D. Tennis – Origins and Mysteries (Dover Publications, 2004) ISBN 0-486-43357-9

External links

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity

International Tennis Federation (ITF)
Association of Tennis Players (ATP) – men's professional tennis organization
Women's Tennis Association (WTA) – women's professional tennis organization
International Tennis Hall of Fame
Grand Slam history (Reference book)

vte

History
Glossary
Match types
Players
Rankings
Statistics
Umpires
Stadiums

Scoring system
point
Strategy
grips
serve-and-volley
Equipment
ball
racket
strings
Official
Technology
electronic line judge
Hawk-Eye
Controversies
Code violations
Doping
Match fixing
Grunting

point

grips
serve-and-volley

ball
racket
strings

electronic line judge
Hawk-Eye

Code violations
Doping
Match fixing
Grunting

Hard
Clay
Grass
Carpet
Wood

Backhand
Backspin
Drop shot
Flat
Forehand
Groundstroke
Half volley
Lob
Passing shot
Serve
ace
double fault
Smash
Topspin
Volley

ace
double fault

Australian Open
French Open
Wimbledon
US Open

Champions
Singles finals
Records

ATP rankings
ATP Tour
1000
500
250
Finals
ATP Challenger Tour
ITF Men's World Tennis Tour

1000
500
250
Finals

WTA rankings
WTA Tour
1000
500
250
Finals
WTA 125 series
ITF Women's World Tennis Tour

1000
500
250
Finals

Davis Cup
Billie Jean King Cup
United Cup
Laver Cup
Hopman Cup

Wightman Cup
World Team Cup
Champions Tennis League
International Premier Tennis League
World TeamTennis
ATP Cup

Olympics
Paralympics
Youth Olympics
Universiade
Commonwealth
Island
Mediterranean

African
Asian
Southeast Asian
Pacific
Pan American
South American

Association of Tennis Professionals
Women's Tennis Association
International Tennis Federation

Tennis portal
 Outline
 WikiCommons

vte

Jannik Sinner
 Alexander Zverev
 Carlos Alcaraz
 Taylor Fritz
 Jack Draper
 Novak Djokovic
 Casper Ruud
 Alex de Minaur
 Lorenzo Musetti
 Holger Rune

Marcelo Arévalo
 Mate Pavić
 Harri Heliövaara
 Henry Patten
 Kevin Krawietz
 Tim Pütz
 Marcel Granollers
 Horacio Zeballos
 Andrea Vavassori
 Simone Bolelli

Aryna Sabalenka
 Iga Świątek
 Jessica Pegula
 Coco Gauff
 Madison Keys
 Jasmine Paolini
 Mirra Andreeva
 Zheng Qinwen
 Emma Navarro
 Paula Badosa

Kateřina Siniaková
 Taylor Townsend
 Erin Routliffe
 Jeļena Ostapenko
 Gabriela Dabrowski
  Sara Errani
  Jasmine Paolini
  Asia Muhammad
  Lyudmyla Kichenok
  Zhang Shuai

vte

Men's champions
Chronological
Women's champions
Chronological
Men's finals
Women's finals
Records
Age at first title
Champions by country
Open Era
Wheelchair men's champions
Wheelchair women's champions
Wheelchair quad champions
Boys' champions
Girls' champions
Men's timeline
Women's timeline
1884–1977
British
Finalists
Performances

Chronological

Chronological

Open Era

1884–1977

Finalists
Performances

Men's champions
Women's champions
Mixed champions
Wheelchair men's champions
Wheelchair women's champions
Wheelchair quad champions
Boys' champions
Girls' champions

Open Era records
All-time records
ATP records
Masters records
Top-level tournament champions
Rankings
ATP No. 1s
All-time No. 1s
ITF World Champions
Top ten
1912–1972
1973–present
ATP Finals
Past finals
Appearances
ATP Awards
Misc.
List of players

ATP No. 1s
All-time No. 1s
ITF World Champions
Top ten
1912–1972
1973–present

1912–1972
1973–present

Past finals
Appearances

ATP records
Rankings
ATP No. 1s
ITF World Champions
Masters records
Top-level tournament champions
List of players

ATP No. 1s
ITF World Champions

Open Era records
All-time records
WTA records
WTA 1000 records
Top-level tournament champions
Rankings
WTA No. 1s
All-time No. 1s
ITF World Champions
Top ten
1921–1974
1975–present
WTA Finals
Past finals
Appearances
WTA Awards
List of players

WTA No. 1s
All-time No. 1s
ITF World Champions
Top ten
1921–1974
1975–present

1921–1974
1975–present

Past finals
Appearances

WTA records
Rankings
WTA No. 1s
ITF World Champions
WTA 1000 records
Top-level tournament champions
List of players

WTA No. 1s
ITF World Champions

Notable rivalries
Open Era
Titles leaders
Players' achievements
Rankings by country
Olympic medalists
ITF rankings
Davis Cup champions
Billie Jean King Cup champions
ATP Cup champions

Titles leaders
Players' achievements
Rankings by country

Davis Cup champions
Billie Jean King Cup champions

Tennis portal
Matches
Longest
Shortest
Bagel
Golden set
Tiebreaker
Serving
Speed
Aces
Double faults

Longest
Shortest
Bagel
Golden set
Tiebreaker

Speed
Aces
Double faults

vte

Aquatics
Artistic
Diving
Marathon Swimming
Swimming
Water polo
Archery
Athletics
Badminton
Basketball
3x3
Boxing
Canoeing
Canoe slalom
Canoe sprint
Cycling
BMX racing
Freestyle BMX
Mountain biking
Road cycling
Track cycling
Equestrian
Dressage
Eventing
Show jumping
Fencing
Field hockey
Football
Golf
Gymnastics
Artistic gymnastics
Rhythmic gymnastics
Trampolining
Handball
Judo
Modern pentathlon
Rowing
Rugby sevens
Sailing
Shooting
Skateboarding
Sport climbing
Surfing
Table tennis
Taekwondo
Tennis
Triathlon
Volleyball
Beach volleyball
Weightlifting
Wrestling
Freestyle wrestling
Greco-Roman wrestling

Artistic
Diving
Marathon Swimming
Swimming
Water polo

3x3

Canoe slalom
Canoe sprint

BMX racing
Freestyle BMX
Mountain biking
Road cycling
Track cycling

Dressage
Eventing
Show jumping

Artistic gymnastics
Rhythmic gymnastics
Trampolining

Beach volleyball

Freestyle wrestling
Greco-Roman wrestling

Baseball / Softball
Cricket
Flag football
Lacrosse
Squash

See also: Paralympic sports and Winter Olympic sports

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataJapanCzech RepublicIsrael

NARA

Prehistoric
Ancient
Thermal
Gunpowder
Timeline
Post-classical
Castles
Early modern
Military revolution
Pike and shot
Napoleonic warfare
Late modern
Industrial warfare
Fourth-gen warfare
AI warfare

Thermal
Gunpowder
Timeline

Timeline

Castles

Military revolution
Pike and shot
Napoleonic warfare

Industrial warfare
Fourth-gen warfare
AI warfare

Organization
Command and control
Defense ministry
Reserves
Ranks

Branches:
Army
Navy
Air force
Marines
Coast guard
Border guard
Special forces
Cyber force
Space force

Specialties:
Staff
Engineers
Intel
Recon
Medical
Police
Diving
Pilot

Land units:
Infantry
Armor
Cavalry
Artillery
Special forces
Signal corps

Cavalry

Naval units:
Warships
Submarines
Aircraft carriers
Landing craft
Auxiliary ships

Air units:
Fighters
Bombers
Command
Close air support
Electronic-warfare
Reconnaissance

Combat systems:
Fire-control system
Fire-control radar
Director (military)
Combat information center
Sonar
Radar

Historical:
Ship gun fire-control
Gun data computer
Torpedo data computer

Development:
Basic training
Military manoeuvrers
Combat training

Aerospace
Aerial
Airborne
Space

Aerial
Airborne
Space

Land
Cold-region
Desert
Fortification
Jungle
Mountain
Urban
Subterranean
Tunnel

Cold-region
Desert
Fortification
Jungle
Mountain
Urban
Subterranean
Tunnel

Tunnel

Sea
Amphibious
Blue
Brown
Green
Surface
Underwater
Seabed

Amphibious
Blue
Brown
Green
Surface
Underwater
Seabed

Seabed

Cyber
Information

Air defence
Armor
Artillery
Barrage
Biological
Camouflage
Cavalry
Horses
Air cavalry
Chemical
Combined arms
Conventional
Cyber
Denial
Disinformation
Drone / Robot
Electromagnetic
Firearms
Infantry
Loitering
Missile
Music
Nuclear
Psychological
Radiological
Submarine
Unconventional

Horses
Air cavalry

Aerial
Airlift
Air assault
Airbridge
Airdrop
Anti-aircraft
Anti-sub
Anti-tank
Battle
Cavalry
Charge
CQC
Counterattack
Counterinsurgency
Convoy
Defeat in detail
Foxhole
Drone
Envelopment
Formation
Guerrilla
Naval
Rapid dominance
Encirclement
Investment
Siege
Swarm
Screen
Tactical objective
Target saturation
Trench
Withdrawal

Air assault
Airbridge
Airdrop

Siege

Military operation
Special
Operations research
Blitzkrieg
Expeditionary
Deep operation
Maneuver
Operational manoeuvre group
Raid
Covert
Stay-behind

Special

Military campaign
Anti-access
Attrition
Commerce raiding
Counter-offensive
Culminating
Defence in depth
Fabian
Empty fort
Mosaic
Deception
Defensive
Depth
Goal
Nuclear
Naval
Offensive
Scorched earth

Asymmetric
Blockade
Broken-backed
Class
Cold war
Colonial
Conquest
Containment
Divide and conquer
Economic
Endemic
Fleet in being
Irregular
Liberation
Limited
Network-centric
New generation
Perpetual
Political
Princely
Proxy
Religious
Resource
Strategic
Succession
Technology
Theater
Total war
World war

Branch
Policy
Staff
Training
Service
Sociology

Area of responsibility
Chain of command
Command and control
Doctrine
Order of battle
Principles of war
Economy of force
Medicine
Engineers
Intelligence
Ranks
Technology and equipment

Recruitment
Conscription
Draft evasion
Mobilization
Training
Specialism
Soldier
Morale
Volunteer
Women
Children
Transgender
Harassment
Conscientious objector
Conscription and sexism
Counter-recruitment

History
War economy
Arms industry
Materiel
Supply-chain management
Military–industrial complex
Base
MOB
FOB
Outpost

MOB
FOB
Outpost

Power projection
Loss-of-strength gradient
Lanchester's laws
Force multiplication
Morale

Force multiplication

Belligerent
Occupation
Armistice
Ceasefire
Court-martial
Desertion
Geneva Conventions
Geneva Protocol
Islamic rules
Justice
Lawful / Unlawful combatant
Perfidy
Regular / Irregular
Jewish laws on war
Right of conquest
Right of self-defence
Rules of engagement
Self-determination
Martial law
War crime
War and genocide
War treason

Air supremacy
Appeasement
Command of the sea
Deterrence theory
Full-spectrum dominance
Overmatch
Unrestricted warfare
Just war theory
Principles of war
Philosophy of war
Security dilemma
Tripwire force
Wargaming
Simulation
Exercises
Combat effectiveness
Center of gravity

Tripwire force

Simulation
Exercises

Arms control
Counter-insurgency
Deterrence
Disaster response
Grey-zone
Gunboat diplomacy
Humanitarian aid
Law enforcement
Low-intensity conflict
Military engineering
Peacekeeping
Peacebuilding
Peace through strength
Show of force

Peacebuilding
Peace through strength

Awards and decorations
Battle cry
Warrior
War film
Military science fiction
War novel
Anti-war movement
Foot drill
War song
Uniform
Wargame
Militarization / Militarism
Antimilitarism
Camp follower

Antimilitarism

Seven Military Classics
The Art of War
De re militari
Strategemata

The Art of War

Women in war
War resister
War studies
Horses in warfare
Wartime sexual violence
Fifth column
Mercenary
Pacifism
Privateer
Private military company
Soldiers are murderers

Battles
Military occupations
Military terms
Operations
Sieges
War crimes
Wars
Weapons
Writers

vte

Military history is the study of armed conflict in the history of humanity, and its impact on the societies, cultures and economies thereof, as well as the resulting changes to local and international relationships.

Professional historians normally focus on military affairs that had a major impact on the societies involved as well as the aftermath of conflicts, while amateur historians and hobbyists often take a larger interest in the details of battles, equipment, and uniforms in use.

The essential subjects of military history study are the causes of war, the social and cultural foundations, military doctrine on each side, the logistics, leadership, technology, strategy, and tactics used, and how these changed over time. On the other hand, just war theory explores the moral dimensions of warfare, and to better limit the destructive reality caused by war, seeks to establish a doctrine of military ethics.

As an applied field, military history has been studied at academies and service schools because the military command seeks to not repeat past mistakes, and improve upon its current performance by instilling an ability in commanders to perceive historical parallels during a battle, so as to capitalize on the lessons learned from the past. When certifying military history instructors[1] the Combat Studies Institute deemphasizes rote detail memorization and focuses on themes and context in relation to current and future conflict, using the motto "Past is Prologue."[2]

The discipline of military history is dynamic, changing with development as much of the subject area as the societies and organisations that make use of it.[3] The dynamic nature of the discipline of military history is largely due to the rapid change of military forces, and the art and science of managing them, as well as the frenetic pace of technological development that had taken place during the period known as the Industrial Revolution, and more recently in the nuclear and information ages. An important recent concept is the Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) which attempts to explain how warfare has been shaped by emerging technologies, such as gunpowder. It highlights the short outbursts of rapid change followed by periods of relative stability.

Popular versus academic military history

In terms of the history profession in major countries, military history is an orphan, despite its enormous popularity with the general public. William H. McNeill points out:

In recent decades University level courses in military history remain popular; often they use films to humanize the combat experience. For example, Eugene P. A. Scleh, history professor at the University of Maine, has explored the advantages and problems of teaching a course of "Modern War and Its Images" entirely through films. Students said they found the documentaries more valuable than the dramas.[6] However, military historians are frustrated by their marginal status in major history departments.[7][8]

Academic historians concerned with military topics have their own scholarly organization, Society for Military History. Since 1937 it has published The Journal of Military History. Its four issues a year include scholarly articles reviews of new books, and a bibliography of new publications and dissertations. The Society has 2300 members, holds an annual convention, and gives out prizes for the best scholarship.[9]

Historiography of military history

Historiography is the study of the history and method of the discipline of history or the study of a specialised topic. In this case, military history with an eye to gaining an accurate assessment of conflicts using all available sources. For this reason military history is periodised, creating overlaying boundaries of study and analysis in which descriptions of battles by leaders may be unreliable due to the inclination to minimize mention of failure and exaggerate success. Military historians use Historiographical analysis in an effort to allow an unbiased, contemporary view of records.[10]

One military historian, Jeremy Black, outlined problems 21st-century military historians face as an inheritance of their predecessors: Eurocentricity, a technological bias, a focus on leading military powers and dominant military systems, the separation of land from sea and recently air conflicts, the focus on state-to-state conflict, a lack of focus on political "tasking" in how forces are used.[11]

If these challenges were not sufficient for military historians, the limits of method are complicated by the lack of records, either destroyed or never recorded due to their value as a military secret. Scholars still do not know the exact nature of Greek fire, for instance. Researching Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom, for example, have presented unique challenges to historians due to records that were destroyed to protect classified military information, among other reasons. Historians use their knowledge of government regulation and military organization, and employing a targeted and systematic research strategy to piece together war histories.[12] Despite these limits, wars are some of the most studied and detailed periods of human history.

Military historians have often compared organization, tactical and strategic ideas, leadership, and national support of the militaries of different nations.[13]

In the early 1980s, historian Jeffrey Kimball studied the influence of a historian's political position on current events on interpretive disagreement regarding the causes of 20th century wars. He surveyed the ideological preferences of 109 active diplomatic historians in the United States as well as 54 active military historians. He finds that their current political views are moderately correlated with their historiographical interpretations. A clear position on the left-right continuum regarding capitalism was apparent in most cases. All groups agreed with the proposition, "historically, Americans have tended to view questions of their national security in terms of such extremes as good vs. evil." Though the Socialists were split, the other groups agreed that "miscalculation and/or misunderstanding of the situation" had caused U.S. interventionism." Kimball reports that:

Online resources

People interested in military history from all periods of time, and all subtopics, are increasingly turning to the Internet for many more resources than are typically available in nearby libraries. Since 1993, one of the most popular sites, with over 4000 members (subscriptions are free) has been H-WAR, sponsored by the H-Net network based at Michigan State University.[15] H-War has six coeditors, and an academic advisory board that sets policy. It sponsors daily moderated discussions of current topics, announcements of new publications and conferences, and reports on developments at conferences. The H-Net family of lists has sponsored and published over 46,000 scholarly book reviews, thousands of which deal with books in military history broadly conceived.[16] Wikipedia itself has a very wide coverage of military history, with over 180,000 articles. Its editors sponsor Wikipedia:WikiProject Military history and encourage readers to join.[17]

Military and war museums

Military museums specialize in military histories; they are often organized from a national point of view, where a museum in a particular country will have displays organized around conflicts in which that country has taken part. They typically take a broad view of warfare's role in the nation's history.[18] They typically include displays of weapons and other military equipment, uniforms, wartime propaganda, and exhibits on civilian life during wartime, and decorations, among others. A military museum may be dedicated to a particular or area, such as the Imperial War Museum Duxford for military aircraft, Deutsches Panzermuseum for tanks, the Lange Max Museum for the Western Front (World War I), the International Spy Museum for espionage, The National World War I Museum for World War I, the "D-Day Paratroopers Historical Center" (Normandy) for WWII airborne, or more generalist, such as the Canadian War Museum or the Musée de l'Armée. For the Italian alpine wall one can find the most popular museum of bunkers in the small museum n8bunker at Olang / Kronplatz in the heard of the dolomites of South Tyrol. The U.S. Army and the state National Guards operate 98 military history museums across the United States and three abroad.[19]

Curators debate how or whether the goal of providing diverse representations of war, in terms of positive and negative aspects of warfare. War is seldom presented as a good thing, but soldiers are heavily praised. David Lowenthal has observed that in today's museums, "nothing seems too horrendous to commemorate". Yet as Andrew Whitmarsh notes, "museums frequently portray a sanitised version of warfare."[20] The actual bomber that dropped the atomic bomb on Japan became the focus of an angry national controversy with veterans attacking curators and historians when the Smithsonian Institution planned to put its fuselage on public display in 1995. The uproar led to cancellation of the exhibit.[21]

Early historians

The documentation of military history begins with the confrontation between Upper and Lower Egypt c. 3150 BC and Sumer (current Iraq) and Elam (current Iran) c. 2700 BC near the modern Basra. The Egyptian military scribe Tjaneni recorded the Battle of Megiddo (15th century BC) which is accepted as the first battle in relatively reliable detail.[22] Military details are abundant in heroic epics, such as the Epic of Gilgames, Fall of Jericho and Conquest of Canaan, Trojan War in Homer's Iliad, and Mahabharata (though their historicity has been challenged). More credible records of the Israelite military history from the conquest of Canaan to the defeats by the Assyrian and Babylonian Empires are in the Biblical historical books following the Book of Joshua.

Next were The Histories by Herodotus (484–425 BC) who is often called the "father of history",[23] and the History of the Peloponnesian War by Thucydides. Despite being an Athenian, Thucydides' impartiality allowed him to take advantage of his exile to research the war from different perspectives by carefully examining documents and interviewing eyewitnesses.[24] An approach centered on the analysis of a leader was taken by Xenophon (430–355 BC) in Anabasis, recording the expedition of Cyrus the Younger into Anatolia. And Anabasis of Alexander described the expedition in the reverse direction. Greek historians of the 2nd century BC, such as Polybius, and later Roman historians, such as Sallust, Livy, Appian and Cassius Dio, wrote about wars of the rise of Rome to the primacy over the Mediterranean. The memoirs of the Roman Julius Caesar (100–44 BC) enable a comparative approach for campaigns such as Commentarii de Bello Gallico and Commentarii de Bello Civili.

East of the Mediterranean world, Arthashastra in India and The Art of War, The Book of Lord Shang, and less known but not less rich in military records Guanzi in China present strategic doctrines during the Axial Age. Records of the Grand Historian by Sima Qian and Han Fei Zi describe the Warring States of China and the former also its culmination in the Qin wars of unification.

Technological evolution

The nature of warfare never changes, only its superficial manifestations. Joshua and David, Hector and Achilles would recognize the combat that our soldiers and Marines have waged in the alleys of Somalia and Iraq. The uniforms evolve, bronze gives way to titanium, arrows may be replaced by laser-guided bombs, but the heart of the matter is still killing your enemies until any survivors surrender and do your will.

New weapons development can dramatically alter the face of war, the cost of warfare, the preparations, and the training of soldiers and leaders. A rule of thumb is that if your enemy has a potentially war winning weapon, you have to either match it or neutralize it.[26]

Ancient era

Chariots originated around 2000 BC. The chariot was an effective, fast weapon; while one man controlled the maneuvering of the chariot, a second bowman could shoot arrows at enemy soldiers. These became crucial to the maintenance of several governments, including the New Egyptian Kingdom and the Shang dynasty and the nation states of the early to middle Zhou dynasty.[27][28]

Some of the military unit types and technologies which were developed in the ancient world are:[29]

Slinger
Hoplite
Auxiliaries
Infantry
Archery
Chariots
Cavalry

For settled agrarian civilizations, the infantry became the core of military action. The infantry started as opposing armed groups of soldiers underneath commanders. The Greeks and early Romans used rigid, heavily armed phalanxes. The Macedonians and Hellenistic states would adopt phalanx formations with sarissa pikemen. The Romans would later adopt more flexible maniples from their neighbors which made them extremely successful in the field of battle. The kingdoms of the Warring States in East Asia also adopted infantry combat, a transition from chariot warfare from centuries earlier.[30]

Archers were a major component of many ancient armies, notably those of the Persians, Scythians, Egyptians, Nubians, Indians, Chinese, Koreans and Japanese.

Cavalry became an important tool. In the Sicilian Expedition, led by Athens in an attempt to subdue Syracuse, the well-trained Syracusan cavalry became crucial to the success of the Syracusans. Macedonian Alexander the Great effectively deployed his cavalry forces to secure victories. In battles such as the Battle of Cannae of the Second Punic War, and the Battle of Carrhae of the Roman-Persian Wars, the importance of the cavalry would be repeated.[31]

There were also horse archers, who had the ability to shoot on horseback—the Parthians, Scythians, Mongols, and other various steppe people were especially fearsome with this tactic. By the 3rd–4th century AD, heavily armored cavalry became widely adopted by the Parthians, Sasanians, Byzantines, Eastern Han dynasty and Three Kingdoms, etc.

The early Indo-Iranians developed the use of chariots in warfare. The scythed chariot was later invented in India and soon adopted by the Persians.[32]

War elephants were sometimes deployed for fighting in ancient warfare. They were first used in India and later adopted by the Persians. War elephants were also used in the Battle of the Hydaspes River, and by Hannibal in the Second Punic War against the Romans.[33] One of the most important military transactions of the ancient world was Chandragupta Maurya's gift of 500 elephants to Seleucus I Nicator.[34]

Naval warfare was often crucial to military success. Early navies used sailing ships without cannons; often the goal was to ram the enemy ships and cause them to sink. There was human oar power, often using slaves, built up to ramming speed. Galleys were used in the 3rd millennium BC by the Cretans. The Greeks later advanced these ships.[35][36]

In 1210 BC, the first recorded naval battle was fought between Suppiluliuma II, king of the Hittites, and Cyprus, which was defeated. In the Greco-Persian Wars, the navy became of increasing importance.

Triremes were involved in more complicated sea-land operations. Themistocles helped to build up a stronger Greek navy, composed of 310 ships, and defeated the Persians at the Battle of Salamis, ending the Persian invasion of Greece.[37]

In the First Punic War, the war between Carthage and Rome started with an advantage to Carthage because of their naval experience. A Roman fleet was built in 261 BC, with the addition of the corvus that allowed Roman soldiers to board enemy ships. The bridge would prove effective at the Battle of Mylae, resulting in a Roman victory.

The Vikings, in the 8th century AD, invented a ship propelled by oars with a dragon decorating the prow, hence called the Drakkar. The 12th century AD Song dynasty invented ships with watertight bulkhead compartments while the 2nd century BC Han dynasty invented rudders and sculled oars for their warships.

Fortifications are important in warfare. Early hill-forts were used to protect inhabitants in the Iron Age. They were primitive forts surrounded by ditches filled with water. Forts were then built out of mud bricks, stones, wood, and other available materials. Romans used rectangular fortresses built out of wood and stone. As long as there have been fortifications, there have been contraptions to break in, dating back to the times of Romans and earlier. Siege warfare is often necessary to capture forts.[38]

Middle-ages

Some of the military unit types and technologies which were used in the medieval period are:

Artillery
Cataphract
Condottieri
Fyrd
Rashidun
Mobile guard
Mamluk
Janissary
Knight (see also: Chivalry)
Crossbow
Pikeman
Samurai
Sipahi
Trebuchet

Bows and arrows were often used by combatants. Egyptians shot arrows from chariots effectively. The crossbow was developed around 500 BC in China, and was used heavily in the Middle Ages.[39] The English/Welsh longbow from the 12th century also became important in the Middle Ages. It helped to give the English a large early advantage in the Hundred Years' War, even though the English were eventually defeated. The Battle of Crécy and the Battle of Agincourt are excellent examples of how to destroy an enemy using a longbow. It dominated battlefields for over a century.

Gunpowder

There is evidence for gunpowder evolving slowly from formulations by Chinese alchemists as early as the 4th century, at first as experiments for life force and metal transmutation, and later experiments as pyrotechnics and incendiaries. By the 10th century, the developments in gunpowder led to many new weapons that were improved over time.[40] The Chinese used incendiary devices based on this in siege warfare against the Mongols starting in the mid 13th century. "Pots with wicks of flax or cotton were used, containing a combination of sulfur, saltpeter (potassium nitrate), aconitine, oil, resin, ground charcoal and wax."[41] Joseph Needham argued the Chinese were able to destroy buildings and walls using such devices. Such experimentation was not present in Western Europe, where the combination of saltpeter, sulfur and charcoal were used exclusively for explosives and as a propellant in firearms. What the Chinese often referred to as the "fire drug" arrived in Europe, fully fleshed out, as gunpowder.[42]

Cannons were first used in Europe in the early 14th century, and played a vital role in the Hundred Years' War. The first cannons were simply welded metal bars in the form of a cylinder, and the first cannonballs were made of stone. By 1346, at the Battle of Crécy, the cannon had been used; at the Battle of Agincourt they would be used again.[43][44]

The first infantry firearms, from fire lances to hand cannons, were held in one hand, while the explosive charge was ignited by a lit match or hot coal held in the other hand. In the mid-15th century came the matchlock, allowing the gun to be aimed and fired while held steady with both hands, as used in the arquebus. Starting about 1500, clever but complicated firing mechanisms were invented to generate sparks to ignite the powder instead of a lit match, starting with the wheel lock, snaplock, snaphance, and finally the flintlock mechanism, which was simple and reliable, becoming standard with the musket by the early 17th century.

At the beginning of the 16th century, the first European fire ships were used. Ships were filled with flammable materials, set on fire, and sent to enemy lines. This tactic was successfully used by Francis Drake to scatter the Spanish Armada at the Battle of Gravelines,[45] and would later be used by the Chinese, Russians, Greeks, and several other countries in naval battles.

Naval mines were invented in the 17th century, though they were not used in great numbers until the American Civil War. They were used heavily in the First and Second World Wars. Air-deployed naval mines were used to mine the North Vietnamese port of Haiphong during the Vietnam War. The Iraqi Navy of Saddam Hussein used naval mines extensively during the Tanker War, as part of the Iran–Iraq War.

The first navigable submarine was built in 1624 by Cornelius Drebbel, it could cruise at a depth of 15 feet (5 m). However, the first military submarine was constructed in 1885 by Isaac Peral.[46]

The Turtle was developed by David Bushnell during the American Revolution. Robert Fulton then improved the submarine design by creating the Nautilus.[47]

The Howitzer, a type of field artillery, was developed in the 17th century to fire high trajectory explosive shells at targets that could not be reached by flat trajectory projectiles.

Organizational changes resulting in better training and intercommunication, made the concept combined arms possible, allowing the use of infantry, cavalry, and artillery in a coordinated way.[citation needed]

Bayonets also became of wide usage to infantry soldiers. Bayonet is named after Bayonne, France where it was first manufactured in the 16th century. It is used often in infantry charges to fight in hand-to-hand combat. General Jean Martinet introduced the bayonet to the French army. They were used heavily in the American Civil War, and continued to be used in modern wars like the Invasion of Iraq.[48]

Balloons were first used in warfare at the end of the 18th century. It was first introduced in Paris of 1783; the first balloon traveled over 5 miles (8 km). Previously military scouts could only see from high points on the ground, or from the mast of a ship. Now they could be high in the sky, signalling to troops on the ground. This made it much more difficult for troop movements to go unobserved.[49]

At the end of the 18th century, iron-cased artillery rockets were successfully used militarily in India against the British by Tipu Sultan of the Kingdom of Mysore during the Anglo-Mysore Wars. Rockets were generally inaccurate at that time, though William Hale, in 1844, was able to develop a better rocket. The new rocket no longer needed the rocket stick, and had a higher accuracy.[50]

In the 1860s there were a series of advancements in rifles. The first repeating rifle was designed in 1860 by a company bought out by Winchester, which made new and improved versions. Springfield rifles arrived in the mid-19th century also. Machine guns arrived in the late 19th century. Automatic rifles and light machine guns first arrived at the beginning of the 20th century.[51]

In the later part of the 19th century, the self-propelled torpedo was developed. The HNoMS Rap was the world's first torpedo boat.[52]

Early guns and artillery

The fire lance, the predecessor of the gun, was invented in China between the tenth and eleventh century. The barrel was originally designed out of bamboo shoots, later with metal. Joseph Needham notes "all the long preparations and tentative experiments were made in China, and everything came to Islam and the West fully fledged, whether it was the fire lance or the explosive bomb, the rocket or the metal-barrel handgun and bombard."[42] By the 1320s Europe had guns, but scholars state that the exact time and method of migration from China remains a mystery. Evidence of firearms is found in Iran and Central Asia in the late fourteenth century. It was not until roughly 1442 that guns were referenced in India. Reliable references to guns in Russia begin around 1382.[citation needed]

An illustration of a "pot-shaped gun" found in the Holkham Hall Milemete manuscript dated to 1326 shows earliest advent of firearms in European history. The illustration shows an arrow, set in the pot-shaped gun pointed directly at a structure. Archaeological evidence of such "gun arrows" were discovered in Eltz Castle, "dated by relation to a historical event (a feud with the Archbishop of Trier in 1331–36 leading to a siege), seem to confirm again that this was at least one of the types of guns like the Milemete used in these very early examples."[53]

According to Peter Fraser Purton, the best evidence of the earliest gun in Europe is the Loshult gun, dated to the fourteenth century. Discovered in 1861, the Loshult was made of bronze measured 11.8 inches in length. A replica of the Loshult was created, using similar gunpowder compounds with present-day materials, to determine the effectiveness of the weapon. The Gunpowder Research Group, who designed the recreation, found that at high elevations, the Loshult could fire as far as 1300 meters.[53] Though inaccurate, missing targets further than 200 meters, the Loshult could fire a range of projectiles such as arrows and shot.[42] It was determined that the Loshult could be effectively fired at ranks of soldiers and structures.

Written works from the Cabinet des Titres of the Imperial Library of Paris has found evidence of canons in France in 1338. The works illustrate canons being used on-board ships at the Rouen during that time. "...an iron Fire-arm, which was provided with forty-eight bolts, made of iron and freather; also one pound of saltpetre and half a pound of sulphur to make the powder propel arrows."[54]

Researchers have been unable to determine the sizes of these cannons and others, outside the artifacts recovered. Sir Henry Brackenbury was able to surmise the approximate size of these cannons by comparing receipts for both the firearms and the corresponding amounts of gunpowder purchased. The receipts show a transaction for "25 Livres for 5 canons." Brackenbury was able to deduce, when comparing the costs of the cannons and the gunpowder apportioned, that they each iron cannon weighed approximately 25 lbs, while the brass cannons weighed roughly 22 lbs.[54]

Philip the Bold (1363–1404) is credited[by whom?] with creating the most effective artillery power in Europe in the late fourteenth century, effectively creating the Burgundian estate. Philip's development of a large artillery army made the small country a reputable force against larger empires such as England and France.[original research?][55][failed verification] Philip had achieved this by establishing a large scale artillery manufacturing economy in Burgundy.[42] Philip used his new cache of artillery to help the French capture an English-held fortress of Odruik. The artillery used to take Odruik used cannonballs measuring to about 450 pounds.[42]

Large artillery was a major contributing factor to the fall of Constantinople at the hands of Mehmed the Conqueror (1432–1481). Having resigned his position as ruler due to youth and inexperience in 1446, Mehmed moved to the Ottoman capital of Manisa.[56] After his father, Murad II died in 1451, Mehmed once again became Sultan. He turned his attention to claiming the Byzantine capital, Constantinople. Mehmed, like Philip, started mass-producing cannons by enticing craftsmen to his cause with money and freedom. For 55 days, Constantinople was bombarded with artillery fire, throwing cannonballs as large as 800 lbs at its walls. On 29 May 1453, Constantinople fell into Ottoman control.[42]

Early firearm tactics

As guns and artillery became more advanced and prevalent, so to did the tactics by which they were implemented. According to Historian Michael Roberts "...a military revolution began with the broad adoption of firearms and artillery by late sixteenth-century European armies."[57] Infantry with firearms replaced cavalry. Empires adapted their strongholds to withstand artillery fire. Eventually drilling strategies and battlefield tactics were adapted for the evolution in firearms use.

In Japan, at the same time during the sixteenth-century, this military evolution was also taking hold. These changes included a universal adoption of firearms, tactical developments for effective use, logistical restructuring within the military itself, and "the emergence of centralized and political and institutional relationships indicative of the early modern order."[57]

Tactically, beginning with Oda Nobunaga, the technique known as "volleying" or countermarch drills were implemented.[42] Volley fire is an organized implementation of firearms, where infantry are structured in ranks. The ranks will alternate between loading and firing positions, allowing more consistent rates of fire and preventing enemies from taking over a position while members reload.

Historical evidence shows that Oda Nobunaga implemented his volley technique successfully in 1575, twenty years before evidence of such a technique is shown in Europe. The first indications of the countermarch technique in Europe was by Lord William Louis of Nassau (1538–1574) in the mid-1590s.[57][42]

Korea also seemed to be adapting the volley technique, earlier than even the Japanese. "Koreans seem to have employed some kind of volley principle with guns by 1447, when the Korean King Sejong the Great instructed his gunners to shoot their 'fire barrels' in squads of five, taking turns firing and loading."[42]

This was on display during what Kenneth Swope called the First Great East Asian War, when Japan was trying to take control and subjugate Korea.[58] Toyotomi Hideyoshi (1537–1598) made a failed invasion of Korea, which lasted six years, eventually pushed back by the Koreans with the aid of Ming China.[42] Japan, using overwhelming firepower, had many early victories on the Korean peninsulas. Though the Koreans had similar manpower, "the curtain of arrows thrown up by defenders was wiped out by [Japanese] gunfire."[57] After the Japanese were finally pushed back in 1598, sweeping military reforms took place in Korea, largely based on updating and implementing the volley technique with firearms.

It was Qi Jiguang, a Ming Chinese General that provided the original treatise, disseminated to Koreans, that aided in this venture. In these manuals, Qi "...gave detailed instructions in the use of small group tactics, psychological warfare, and other 'modern' techniques."[58] Qi emphasized repetitive drilling, dividing men into smaller groups, separating the strong from weak. Qi's ethos was one of synthesizing smaller groups, trained in various tactical formations, into larger companies, battalions and armies. By doing this they could "operate as eyes, hands, and feet..." aiding to overall unit cohesion.[58]

Modern technologies

At the start of the World Wars, various nations had developed weapons that were a surprise to their adversaries, leading to a need to learn from this, and alter how to combat them. Flame throwers were first used in the First World War. The French were the first to introduce the armored car in 1902. Then in 1918, the British produced the first armored troop carrier. Many early tanks were proof of concept but impractical until further development. In World War I, the British and French held a crucial advantage due to their superiority in tanks; the Germans had only a few dozen A7V tanks, as well as 170 captured tanks. The British and French both had several hundred each. The French tanks included the 13 ton Schneider CA1, with a 75 mm gun, and the British had the Mark IV and Mark V tanks.[59]

On 17 December 1903, the Wright Brothers performed the first controlled, powered, heavier-than-air flight; it went 39 meters (120 ft). In 1907, the first helicopter flew, but it was not practical for usage. Aviation became important in World War I, in which several aces gained fame. In 1911 an aircraft took off from a warship for the first time. Landings on a cruiser were another matter. This led to the development of an aircraft carrier with a decent unobstructed flight deck.[60]

Chemical warfare exploded into the public consciousness in World War I but may have been used in earlier wars without as much human attention. The Germans used gas-filled shells at the Battle of Bolimov in January 1915. These were not lethal, however. In April 1915, the Germans developed a chlorine gas that was highly lethal, and used it to moderate effect at the Second Battle of Ypres. Gas masks were invented in matter of weeks, and poison gas proved ineffective at winning battles. It was made illegal by all nations in the 1920s.[61]

World War II gave rise to even more technology. The worth of aircraft grew from mostly reconnaissance to strategic bombing and more. The worth of the aircraft carrier was proved in the battles between the United States and Japan like the Battle of Midway. Radar was independently invented by the Allies and Axis powers. It used radio waves to detect objects. Molotov cocktails were invented by General Franco in the Spanish Civil War, directing the Nationalists to use them against Soviet tanks in the assault on Toledo. The atomic bomb was developed by the Manhattan Project and dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945, quickly and controversially ending World War II.[62]

During the Cold War, the main powers engaged in a Nuclear arms race[63] which comprised the making of atomic bombs, hydrogen bombs, and more advanced nuclear bombs. In the space race, both nations attempted to launch human beings into space, to the moon and send satellites. Other technological advances were centered on intelligence (like the spy satellite) and missiles (ballistic missiles, cruise missiles). The nuclear submarine was invented in 1955. This meant submarines no longer needed to surface as often, and could run more quietly. They evolved into underwater missile platforms[64] and completed what became called nuclear triad.

Periods of military history

Prehistoric warfare

Prehistoric warfare refers to war that occurred between societies without recorded history. The Tollense valley battlefield is the oldest evidence of a large scale battle in Europe. More than 4,000 warriors fought in a battle on the site in the 13th century BC.[65]

Ancient warfare

Much of what we know of ancient history is the history of militaries: their conquests, their movements, and their technological innovations. There are many reasons for this. Kingdoms and empires, the central units of control in the ancient world, could only be maintained through military force. Due to limited agricultural ability, there were relatively few areas that could support large communities, therefore fighting was common.

The Umma–Lagash war was one of the first wars in recorded history, fought between the Sumerian city-states of Lagash and Umma. The border conflict over the fertile Guedena region lasted for several generations.[66]

Weapons and armor, designed to be sturdy, tended to last longer than other artifacts, and thus a great deal of surviving artifacts recovered tend to fall in this category as they are more likely to survive. Weapons and armor were also mass-produced to a scale that makes them quite plentiful throughout history, and thus more likely to be found in archaeological digs.

Such items were also considered signs of prosperity or virtue, and thus were likely to be placed in tombs and monuments to prominent warriors. And writing, when it existed, was often used for kings to boast of military conquests or victories.

Writing, when used by the common man, also tended to record such events, as major battles and conquests constituted major events that many would have considered worthy of recording either in an epic such as the Homeric writings pertaining to the Trojan War, or even personal writings. Indeed, the earliest stories center on warfare, as war was both a common and dramatic aspect of life; the witnessing of a major battle involving many thousands of soldiers would be quite a spectacle, even today, and thus considered worthy both of being recorded in song and art, but also in realistic histories, as well as being a central element in a fictional work.

Lastly, as nation states evolved and empires grew, the increased need for order and efficiency lead to an increase in the number of records and writings. Officials and armies would have good reason for keeping detailed records and accounts involving any and all things concerning a matter such as warfare that, in the words of Sun Tzu, was "a matter of vital importance to the state". For all these reasons, military history comprises a large part of ancient history.

Notable militaries in the ancient world included the Egyptians, Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, Ancient Greeks (notably the Spartans and Macedonians), Kushites, Indians (notably the Magadhas, Gangaridais, Gandharas and Cholas), Early Imperial Chinese (notably the Qin and Han dynasties), Xiongnu Confederation, Ancient Romans, and Carthaginians.

The fertile crescent of Mesopotamia was the center of several prehistoric conquests. Mesopotamia was conquered by the Sumerians, Akkadians, Babylonians, Assyrians and Persians. Iranians were the first nation to introduce cavalry into their army.[67]

Egypt began growing as an ancient power, but eventually fell to the Libyans, Nubians, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Byzantines and Arabs.

The earliest recorded battle in India was the Battle of the Ten Kings. The Indian epics Mahabharata and Ramayana are centered on conflicts and refer to military formations, theories of warfare and esoteric weaponry. Chanakya's Arthashastra contains a detailed study on ancient warfare, including topics on espionage and war elephants.

Alexander the Great invaded Northwestern India and defeated King Porus in the Battle of the Hydaspes River. The same region was soon re conquered by Chandragupta Maurya after defeating the Macedonians and Seleucids. He also went on to conquer the Nanda Empire and unify Northern India. Most of Southern Asia was unified under his grandson Ashoka the Great after the Kalinga War, though the empire collapsed not long after his reign.

In China, the Shang dynasty and Zhou dynasty had risen and collapsed. This led to a Warring States period, in which several states continued to fight with each other over territory. Philosopher-strategists such as Confucius and Sun Tzu wrote various manuscripts on ancient warfare (as well as international diplomacy).

The Warring States era philosopher Mozi (Micius) and his Mohist followers invented various siege weapons and siegecraft, including the Cloud Ladder (a four-wheeled, extendable ramp) to scale fortified walls during a siege of an enemy city. The warring states were first unified by Qin Shi Huang after a series of military conquests, creating the first empire in China.

His empire was succeeded by the Han dynasty, which expanded into Central Asia, Northern China/Manchuria, Southern China, and present day Korea and Vietnam. The Han came into conflict with settled people such as the Wiman Joseon, and proto-Vietnamese Nanyue. They also came into conflict with the Xiongnu (Huns), Yuezhi, and other steppe civilizations.

The Han defeated and drove the Xiongnus west, securing the city-states along the silk route that continued into the Parthian Empire. After the decline of central imperial authority, the Han dynasty collapsed into an era of civil war and continuous warfare during the Three Kingdoms period in the 3rd century AD.

The Achaemenid Persian Empire was founded by Cyrus the Great after conquering the Median Empire, Neo-Babylonian Empire, Lydia and Asia Minor. His successor Cambyses went on to conquer the Egyptian Empire, much of Central Asia, and parts of Greece, India and Libya. The empire later fell to Alexander the Great after defeating Darius III. After being ruled by the Seleucid dynasty, the Persian Empire was subsequently ruled by the Parthian and Sassanid dynasties, which were the Roman Empire's greatest rivals during the Roman-Persian Wars.

In Greece, several city-states rose to power, including Athens and Sparta. The Greeks successfully stopped two Persian invasions, the first at the Battle of Marathon, where the Persians were led by Darius the Great, and the second at the Battle of Salamis, a naval battle where the Greek ships were deployed by orders of Themistocles and the Persians were under Xerxes I, and the land engagement of the Battle of Plataea.

The Peloponnesian War then erupted between the two Greek powers Athens and Sparta. Athens built a long wall to protect its inhabitants, but the wall helped to facilitate the spread of a plague that killed about 30,000 Athenians, including Pericles. After a disastrous campaign against Syracuse, the Athenian navy was decisively defeated by Lysander at the Battle of Aegospotami.

The Macedonians, underneath Philip II of Macedon and Alexander the Great, invaded Persia and won several major victories, establishing Macedonia as a major power. However, following Alexander's death at an early age, the empire quickly fell apart.

Meanwhile, Rome was gaining power, following a rebellion against the Etruscans. During the three Punic Wars, the Romans defeated the neighboring power of Carthage. The First Punic War centered on naval warfare. The Second Punic War started with Hannibal's invasion of Italy by crossing the Alps. He famously won the encirclement at the Battle of Cannae. However, after Scipio invaded Carthage, Hannibal was forced to follow and was defeated at the Battle of Zama, ending the role of Carthage as a power.

After defeating Carthage the Romans went on to become the Mediterranean's dominant power, successfully campaigning in Greece, (Aemilius Paulus decisive victory over Macedonia at the Battle of Pydna), in the Middle East (Lucius Licinius Lucullus, Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus), in Gaul (Gaius Julius Caesar) and defeating several Germanic tribes (Gaius Marius, Germanicus). While Roman armies suffered several major losses, their large population and ability (and will) to replace battlefield casualties, their training, organization, tactical and technical superiority enabled Rome to stay a predominant military force for several centuries, utilizing well trained and maneuverable armies to routinely overcome the much larger "tribal" armies of their foes (see Battles of Aquae Sextiae, Vercellae, Tigranocerta, Alesia).

In 54 BC, the Roman triumvir Marcus Licinius Crassus took the offensive against the Parthian Empire in the east. In a decisive battle at Carrhae Romans were defeated and the golden Aquilae (legionary battle standards) were taken as trophies to Ctesiphon. The battle was one of the worst defeats suffered by the Roman Republic in its entire history.

While successfully dealing with foreign opponents, Rome experienced numerous civil wars, notably the power struggles of Roman generals such as Marius and Sulla during the end of the Republic. Caesar was also notable for his role in the civil war against the other member of the Triumvirate (Pompey) and against the Roman Senate.

The successors of Caesar—Octavian and Mark Anthony—also fought a civil war with Caesar's assassins (Senators Brutus, Cassius, etc.). Octavian and Mark Anthony eventually fought another civil war between themselves to determine the sole ruler of Rome. Octavian emerged victorious and Rome was turned into an empire with a huge standing army of professional soldiers.

By the time of Marcus Aurelius, the Romans had expanded to the Atlantic Ocean in the west and to Mesopotamia in the east and controlled Northern Africa and Central Europe up to the Black Sea. However, Aurelius marked the end of the Five Good Emperors, and Rome quickly fell into decline.

The Huns, Goths, and other barbaric groups invaded Rome, which continued to suffer from inflation and other internal strifes. Despite the attempts of Diocletian, Constantine I, and Theodosius I, western Rome collapsed and was eventually conquered in 476. The Byzantine empire continued to prosper, however.

Medieval warfare

When stirrups came into use some time during the Dark Ages militaries were forever changed. This invention coupled with technological, cultural, and social developments had forced a dramatic transformation in the character of warfare from antiquity, changing military tactics and the role of cavalry and artillery.

Similar patterns of warfare existed in other parts of the world. In China around the 5th century armies moved from massed infantry to cavalry based forces, copying the steppe nomads. The Middle East and North Africa used similar, if often more advanced, technologies than Europe.

In Japan, the Medieval warfare period is considered by many to have stretched into the 19th century. In Africa along the Sahel and Sudan states like the Kingdom of Sennar and Fulani Empire employed Medieval tactics and weapons well after they had been supplanted in Europe.

In the Medieval period, feudalism was firmly implanted, and there existed many landlords in Europe. Landlords often owned castles to protect their territory.

The Islamic Arab Empire began rapidly expanding throughout the Middle East, North Africa, and Central Asia, initially led by Rashidun Caliphate, and later under the Umayyads. While their attempts to invade Europe by way of the Balkans were defeated by Byzantium and Bulgaria,[68] the Arabs expanded to the Iberian Peninsula in the west and the Indus Valley in the east. The Abassids then took over the Arab Empire, though the Umayyads remained in control of Islamic Spain.

At the Battle of Tours, the Franks under Charles Martel stopped short a Muslim invasion. The Abassids defeated the Tang Chinese army at the Battle of Talas, but were later defeated by the Seljuk Turks and the Mongols centuries later, until the Arab Empire eventually came to an end after the Battle of Baghdad in 1258.

In China, the Sui dynasty had risen and conquered the Chen dynasty of the south. They invaded Vietnam (northern Vietnam had been in Chinese control since the Han dynasty), fighting the troops of Champa, who had cavalry mounted on elephants. After decades of economic turmoil and a failed invasion of Korea, the Sui collapsed and was followed by the Tang dynasty, who fought with various Turkic groups, the Tibetans of Lhasa, the Tanguts, the Khitans, and collapsed due to political fragmentation of powerful regional military governors (jiedushi). The innovative Song dynasty followed next, inventing new weapons of war that employed the use of Greek Fire and gunpowder (see section below) against enemies such as the Jurchens.

The Mongols under Genghis Khan, Ögedei Khan, Möngke Khan, and Kublai Khan conquered most of Eurasia. They took over China, Persia, Turkestan, and Russia. After Kublai Khan took power and created the Yuan dynasty, the divisions of the empire ceased to cooperate with each other, and the Mongol Empire was only nominally united.

In New Zealand, prior to European discovery, oral histories, legends and whakapapa include many stories of battles and wars. Māori warriors were held in high esteem. One group of Polynesians migrated to the Chatham Islands, where they developed the largely pacifist Moriori culture. Their pacifism left the Moriori unable to defend themselves when the islands were invaded by mainland Māori in the 1830s.

They proceeded to massacre the Moriori and enslave the survivors.[69][70] Warrior culture also developed in the isolated Hawaiian Islands. During the 1780s and 1790s the chiefs and alii were constantly fighting for power. After a series of battles the Hawaiian Islands were united for the first time under a single ruler who would become known as Kamehameha I.

Gunpowder warfare

After gunpowder weapons were first developed in Song dynasty China (see also: Technology of the Song dynasty), the technology later spread west to the Ottoman Empire, from where it spread to the Safavid Empire of Persia and the Mughal Empire of India. The arquebus was later adopted by European armies during the Italian Wars of the early 16th century.

This all brought an end to the dominance of armored cavalry on the battlefield. The simultaneous decline of the feudal system—and the absorption of the medieval city-states into larger states—allowed the creation of professional standing armies to replace the feudal levies and mercenaries that had been the standard military component of the Middle Ages.

In Africa, Ahmad ibn Ibrihim al-Ghazi, was the first African commander to use gunpowder on the continent in the Ethiopian–Adal War, that lasted for fourteen years (1529–1543).

The period spanning between the 1648 Peace of Westphalia and the 1789 French Revolution is also known as Kabinettskriege (Princes' warfare) as wars were mainly carried out by imperial or monarchics states, decided by cabinets and limited in scope and in their aims. They also involved quickly shifting alliances, and mainly used mercenaries.

Over the course of the 18th–19th centuries all military arms and services underwent significant developments that included a more mobile field artillery, the transition from use of battalion infantry drill in close order to open order formations and the transfer of emphasis from the use of bayonets to the rifle that replaced the musket, and virtual replacement of all types of cavalry with the universal dragoons, or mounted infantry.

Military Revolution

The Military Revolution is a conceptual schema for explaining the transformation of European military strategy, tactics and technology in the early modern period.[71] The argument is that dramatic advances in technology, government finance, and public administration transformed and modernized European armies, tactics, and logistics. Since warfare was so central to the European state, the transformation had a major impact on modernizing government bureaucracies, taxation, and the national economy. The concept was introduced by Michael Roberts in the 1950s as he focused on Sweden 1560–1660. Roberts emphasized the introduction of muskets that could not be aimed at small targets, but could be very effective when fired in volleys by three ranks of infantry soldiers, with one firing while the other two ranks reloaded. All three ranks march forward to demolish the enemy. The infantry now had the firepower that had been reserved to the artillery, and had mobility that could rapidly advance in the battlefield, which the artillery lacked. The infantry thereby surpassed the artillery in tactical maneuvering on the battlefield. Roberts linked these advances with larger historical consequences, arguing that innovations in tactics, drill and doctrine by the Dutch and Swedes 1560–1660 led to a need for more and better trained troops and thus for permanent forces (standing armies). Armies grew much larger and more expensive. These changes in turn had major political consequences in the level of administrative support and the supply of money, men and provisions, producing new financial demands and the creation of new governmental institutions. "Thus, argued Roberts, the modern art of war made possible—and necessary—the creation of the modern state".[72] In the 1990s the concept was modified and extended by Geoffrey Parker, who argued that developments in fortification and siege warfare caused the revolution. The concept of a military revolution based upon technology has given way to models based more on a slow evolution in which technology plays a minor role to organization, command and control, logistics and in general non-material improvements. The revolutionary nature of these changes was only visible after a long evolution that handed Europe a predominant place in warfare, a place that the industrial revolution would confirm.[73][74]

The concept of a military revolution in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries has received a mixed reception among historians. Noted military historians Michael Duffy and Jeremy Black have strongly criticised it as misleading, exaggerated and simplistic.[75]

Industrial warfare

As weapons—particularly small arms—became easier to use, countries began to abandon a complete reliance on professional soldiers in favor of conscription. Technological advances became increasingly important; while the armies of the previous period had usually had similar weapons, the industrial age saw encounters such as the Battle of Sadowa, in which possession of a more advanced technology played a decisive role in the outcome.[76] Conscription was employed in industrial warfare to increase the number of military personnel that were available for combat. Conscription was notably used by Napoleon Bonaparte and the major parties during the two World Wars.

Total war was used in industrial warfare, the objective being to prevent the opposing nation to engage in war. Napoleon was the innovator.[77] William Tecumseh Sherman's "March to the Sea" and Philip Sheridan's burning of the Shenandoah Valley during the American Civil War were examples.[78][79] On the largest scale the strategic bombing of enemy cities and industrial factories during World War II was total warfare.

Modern warfare

Since the 1940s, preparation for a major war has been based on technological arms races involving all sorts of new weapons systems, such as nuclear and biological, as well as computerized control systems, and the opening of new venues, such as seen in the Space race involving the United States, the Soviet Union, and more recently, China.[80]

Modern war also saw the improvement of armored tank technology. While tanks were present in the First World War, and the Second World War, armored warfare technology came to a head with the start of the Cold War. Many of the technologies commonly seen on main battle tanks today, such as composite armor, high caliber cannons, and advanced targeting systems, would be developed during this time.[citation needed]

A distinctive feature since 1945 is the decline in number and casualties of interstate wars, the absence of wars between developed states, and, since 1954, the absence of wars between major powers. Instead actual fighting has largely been a matter of civil wars and insurgencies.[81]

See also

History portal

War Studies
List of wars by death toll
Ancient Greek warfare
Military science
List of military writers
Maritime history
Military globalization
Naval history
Roman warfare
Society for Military History
Military history of ancient Rome
Military history of Africa
Military history of Europe
Military history of Oceania
Military history of North America
Military history of South America
Military history by country
Journal of Military History, scholarly journal
War in History, scholarly journal
War & Society, scholarly journal
History of physical training and fitness

Notes and references

^ "Military History Instructor Course (MHIC)". Archived from the original on 22 April 2016. Retrieved 6 April 2016.

^ "Becoming a Military History Instructor in the Army". The Griffon 108th. Archived from the original on 20 April 2016. Retrieved 6 April 2016.

^ Cowley, Parker, p. xiii

^ William H McNeill, "Modern European History" in Michael Kammen, ed., The Past Before Us: Contemporary Historical Writing in the United States (1980) pp. 99–100

^ Ian F W Beckett (2016). A Guide to British Military History: The Subject and the Sources. Pen and Sword. p. 24. ISBN 978-1473856677.

^ Eugene P. A. Scleh, "Teaching History Through Film", Film & History (1973) 3#3 pp 12–16.

^ John A. Lynn, "Rally Once Again: The Embattled Future of Academic Military History", Journal of Military History 61 (Oct. 1997), 777–89 online Archived 2021-07-14 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Ronald H. Spector, "Teetering on the Brink of Respectability." Journal of American History (2007) 93(4): 1158–1160. online Archived 2021-07-14 at the Wayback Machine

^ John Whiteclay Chambers, "The new military history: myth and reality." The Journal of Military History 55.3 (1991): 395+.

^ Morillo, Pevkovic, pp. 4–5

^ Black (2004), p. ix

^ Bergen, Hilary, Documenting Shock and Awe: Researching Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom History Associations, 2015. http://www.historyassociates.com/blog/historical-research-blog/researching-iraq-and-afghanistan-wars/ Archived 2015-08-03 at the Wayback Machine

^ Paul Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic Change and Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000 (Random House, 1987)

^ Jeffrey Kimball, "The Influence of Ideology on Interpretive Disagreement: A Report on a Survey of Diplomatic, Military and Peace Historians on the Causes of 20th Century U. S. Wars", The History Teacher  (May, 1984) 17#3 pp. 355–384 in JSTOR Archived 2016-12-25 at the Wayback Machine

^ See H-War policies Archived 2018-12-15 at the Wayback Machine

^ See H-War book reviews Archived 2018-12-15 at the Wayback Machine

^ Richard Jensen,  "Military history on the electronic frontier: Wikipedia fights the War of 1812." The Journal of Military History 76.4 (2012): 523–556 online[dead link].

^ Stephen Wood, "Too serious a business to be left to military men"" Museum International 38.1 (1986): 20–26.

^ R. Cody Phillips,, "The Guide to US Army Museums" (Center for Military History, 2005) online Archived 2017-05-02 at the Wayback Machine

^ Andrew Whitmarsh, "'We Will Remember Them': Memory and Commemoration in War Museums." Journal of Conservation and Museum Studies  (2001) vol 7 pp. 11–15.

^ Otto Mayr, "The  'Enola Gay' Fiasco: History, Politics, and the Museum." Technology and culture 39.3 (1998): 462–473. online Archived 2018-12-17 at the Wayback Machine

^ Nelson, Harold Hayden (1913). The Battle of Megiddo. University of Chicago Press. p. 1.

^ "Herodotus: The father of history" Archived 2005-12-31 at the Wayback Machine, Warburton

^ Farah, Karls, pp. 137–138

^ Peters, Ralph. New Glory: Expanding America's Supremacy, 2005. p. 30

^ Barton C. Hacker, "Military institutions, weapons, and social change: Toward a new history of military technology." Technology and Culture 35.4 (1994): 768–834.

^ Mary Aiken Littauer, "The military use of the chariot in the Aegean in the Late Bronze Age." American Journal of Archaeology 76.2 (1972): 145–157. in JSTOR Archived 2016-04-24 at the Wayback Machine

^ P.R.S. Moorey, "The emergence of the light, horse‐drawn chariot in the Near‐East c. 2000–1500 BC." World Archaeology 18.2 (1986): 196–215.

^ Richard Ernest Dupuy, and Trevor Nevitt Dupuy, The encyclopedia of military history: from 3500 BC to the present (1970).

^ Robin D.S. Yates, "New Light on Ancient Chinese Military Texts: Notes on Their Nature and Evolution, and the Development of Military Specialization in Warring States China." T'oung Pao (1988): 211–248. JSTOR 4528419

^ Leslie J. Worley, Hippeis: the cavalry of Ancient Greece (1994).

^ Jeffrey Rop,  "Reconsidering the Origin of the Scythed Chariot." Historia 62.2 (2013): 167–181.

^ William Gowers, "The African elephant in warfare." African Affairs 46.182 (1947): 42–49. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.afraf.a093538, JSTOR 718841

^ Hermann Kulke and Dietmar Rothermund (1998). "A History of India" (PDF). Routledge. p. 8. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 June 2021. Retrieved 8 April 2021.

^ John S. Morrison, "The Greek Trireme." The Mariner's Mirror 27.1 (1941): 14–44.

^ 
H. T. Wallinga, "The Trireme and History" Mnemosyne  Vol. 43, Fasc. 1/2, 1990 pp. 132–149. JSTOR 4431893

^ Moerbeek, Martijn (January 21, 1998). "The battle of Salamis, 480 BC" Accessed May 16, 2006.

^ See "The Medieval Castle" Archived 2006-06-22 at the Wayback Machine. Accessed May 16, 2006

^ Selby, Stephen (2001). "A Crossbow Mechanism with Some Unique Features from Shandong, China" Archived 2008-05-18 at the Wayback Machine. Accessed on May 17, 2006.

^ Brenda J. Buchanan, ed., Gunpowder, explosives and the state: a technological history (Ashgate, 2006).

^ Raphael, Kate (2009). "Mongol Siege Warfare on the Banks of the Euphrates and the Question of Gunpowder (1260–1312)". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 19 (3): 355–370. doi:10.1017/S1356186309009717. JSTOR 27756073. S2CID 162999079.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Andrade, Tonio (2016). The Gunpowder Age: China, Military Innovation, and the Rise of the West in World History. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0691178141.

^ Calvert, J.B. (February 19, 2006) "Cannons and Gunpowder" Archived 2007-07-01 at the Wayback Machine. Accessed on May 18, 2006

^ H.C.B. Rogers, A History of Artillery (1975).

^ Jorge. The "Invincible" Armada Archived 2006-05-12 at the Wayback Machine. Accessed on May 18, 2006.

^ Tom Parrish, The Submarine: A History (2004)

^ "Early Underwater Warfare". California Center for Military History. 18 May 2006. Archived from the original on 17 February 2006. Retrieved 2 March 2016.

^ Martin J. Brayley, Bayonets: An Illustrated History (2012)

^ John Christopher, Balloons at War: Gasbags, Flying Bombs & Cold War Secrets (2004)

^ HM Iftekhar Jaim, and Jasmine Jaim, "The Decisive Nature of the Indian War Rocket in the Anglo-Mysore Wars of the Eighteenth Century." Arms & Armour 8.2 (2011): 131–138.

^ Robert Held, The Age of Firearms: a pictorial history. (Harper, 1957).

^ George Elliot Armstrong, Torpedoes and Torpedo-vessels (1896) online Archived 2023-06-20 at the Wayback Machine.

^ a b Purton, Peter Fraser (2009). A History of the Late Medieval Siege, 1200–1500. Boydell & Brewer Ltd. ISBN 978-1843834489.

^ a b Brackenbury, Henry (1865). Ancient Cannon in Europe. Woolwich: The Royal Artillery Institution.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: publisher location (link)

^ Crombie, Laura (2016). "A New Power in the Late Fourteenth-Century Low Countries: Philip the Bold's Planned Franco-Burgundian Invasion of England and Scottish Alliance, 1385–1386". History. 101 (344): 3–19. doi:10.1111/1468-229X.12144.

^ Middleton, John (2004). World Monarchies and Dynasties. Routledge. ISBN 978-0765680501.

^ a b c d Stavros, Matthew (October 2013). "Military Revolution in Early Modern Japan". Japanese Studies. 33 (3): 243–261. doi:10.1080/10371397.2013.831733. S2CID 144268167.

^ a b c Swope, Kenneth M. (2013). A Dragon's Head and a Serpent's Tail: Ming China and the First Great East Asian War. University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 978-0806185026.

^ Patrick Wright, Tank: the progress of a monstrous war machine (Penguin, 2003).

^ Norman Polmar, Aircraft carriers: a graphic history of carrier aviation and its influence on world events (1969).

^ Kim Coleman, A history of chemical warfare (Palgrave Macmillan, 2005).

^ Ryan Jenkins, World War 2: New Technologies (2014)

^ Paul P. Craig and John A. Jungerman, The Nuclear Arms Race: Technology and Society (1990)

^ Jeremy Black, The Cold War: A Military History (2015)

^ Curry, Andrew (24 March 2016). "Slaughter at the bridge: Uncovering a colossal Bronze Age battle". Science.

^ "Recently Deciphered 4,500-Year-Old Pillar Shows First Known Record of a Border Dispute". Smithsonian. 7 December 2018.

^ Suren-Pahlav S., General Surena; The Hero of Carrhae

^ s:Great Battles of Bulgaria

^ "Moriori – The impact of new arrivals" Archived 2009-01-03 at the Wayback Machine Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand

^ "Chatham Islands" Archived 2007-09-28 at the Wayback Machine New Zealand A to Z

^ Michael Duffy, The Military Revolution and the State, 1500–1800 (1980).

^ Jeremy Black, "A Military Revolution? A 1660-1792 Perspective", in Clifford J. Rogers, ed., The Military Revolution Debate: Readings on the Military Transformation of Early Modern Europe (1995), pp. 95–115.

^ Jacob, F. & Visoni-Alonzo, G., The Military Revolution in Early Modern Europe, a Revision,  (2016)

^ Geoffrey Parker,  "The Military Revolution, 1560–1660 – A Myth?" Journal of Modern History 48#2 (1976) pp 195–214; online Archived 2018-12-15 at the Wayback Machine

^ Jeremy Black, "A Military Revolution? A 1660–1792 Perspective", pp. 95–115; and Michael Duffy, The Military Revolution and the State, 1500–1800 (1980).

^ John France,  Perilous Glory: The Rise of Western Military Power (2011) pp. 219–264 on 1815–1914.

^ David A. Bell, The first total war: Napoleon's Europe and the birth of modern warfare (2008).

^ John Bennett Walters,  "General William T. Sherman and Total War." Journal of Southern history 14.4 (1948): 447–480.  online Archived 2018-12-15 at the Wayback Machine

^ Mark E. Neely Jr, "Was the Civil War a Total War?." Civil War History 37.1 (1991): 5–28.

^ Alex Roland, "Was the Nuclear Arms Race Deterministic?." Technology and Culture 51.2 (2010): 444–461. online

^ Robert J. Bunker and Pamela Ligouri Bunker, "The modern state in epochal transition: The significance of irregular warfare, state deconstruction, and the rise of new warfighting entities beyond neo-medievalism." Small Wars & Insurgencies 27.2 (2016): 325–344.

Further reading

Archer, I. John R. Ferris, Holger H. Herwig, and Timothy H. E. Travers. World History of Warfare (2nd ed. 2008) 638 pp
Black, Jeremy. Warfare in the Western World, 1775–1882 (2001) 240 pp.
Black, Jeremy. Warfare in the Western World, 1882–1975 (2002), 256 pp.
Brownstone, David, and Irene M. Franck. Timelines of War: A Chronology of Warfare from 100,000 BC to the Present (1994)
Chambers, John Whiteclay, ed. The Oxford Companion to American Military History (2000) online
Cowley, Robert, and Geoffrey Parker, eds. The Reader's Companion to Military History (2001) coverage by scholars. Complete text online free of 1996 edition
Dear, I. C. B., and M. R. D. Foot, eds. Oxford Companion to World War II (2005; 2nd ed. 2010) online
Doughty, Robert, Ira D. Gruber, Roy K. Flint, and Mark Grimsley. Warfare In The Western World (2 vol 1996), comprehensive textbook; online vol 1 to 1871
Dupuy, R. Ernest and Trevor N. Dupuy. The Encyclopedia of Military History: From 3500 B.C. to the Present (1977), 1465 pp; comprehensive summary focused on wars and battles; online
Dyer, Gwynne. The Shortest History of War: From Hunter-Gatherers to Nuclear Superpowers – A Retelling for Our Times (2022).
Grossman, Mark. World military leaders: a biographical dictionary (Infobase Publishing, 2007).
Holmes, Richard, ed. The Oxford Companion to Military History (2001) 1071 pp; online at OUP
Jones, Archer, The Art of War in the Western World (2001)
Kohn, George C. Dictionary of Wars (3rd ed. 2006) 704 pp; very useful summary across world history
Karsten, Peter. ed., Encyclopedia of War and American Society (3 vols., 2005).
Keegan, John. The Face of Battle (1976) excerpt Archived 2018-08-04 at the Wayback Machine
Keegan, John. The Price of Admiralty: The Evolution of Naval Warfare (1989)
Lacroix, Paul. Military and religious life in the Middle Ages and at the period of the Renaissance  (London: Bickers & Son, 1870)
Lamphear, John, ed. African Military History (Routledge, 2007).
Lawrence, D. R. (2009). The complete soldier: military books and military culture in early Stuart England, 1603-1645. Brill.
Lee, Wayne E. Waging War: Conflict, Culture, and Innovation in World History (2015) excerpt Archived 2023-01-09 at the Wayback Machine
Lynn, John A. Battle: A Cultural History of Combat and Culture (2003).
Muehlbauer, Matthew S., and David J. Ulbrich, eds. The Routledge History of Global War and Society (Routledge, 2018).
Nolan, Cathal J. The Allure of Battle: A History of How Wars Have Been Won and Lost (2017)
Nolan, Cathal J. The Age of Wars of Religion, 1000–1650: An Encyclopedia of Global Warfare and Civilization (2 vol 2006)
Parkinson, Roger. Encyclopedia of modern war (Routledge, 2021); since 1793.
Roy, Kaushik. A Global History of Pre-Modern Warfare: Before the Rise of the West, 10,000 BCE–1500 CE. (Routledge, 2021).
De Salazar, Gonzalo, "War, Peace and Civilization" [Guerra, paz y civilización], (Madrid: MAEC, 2016).
De Salazar, Gonzalo, "Crime and Armed Conflict" [Crimen y conflicto armado], (Madrid: MAEC, 2018).
Townshend, Charles, ed. The Oxford History of Modern War (2nd ed. 2005)
Trevor, N et al. Encyclopedia of military biography (Bloomsbury 2020).
Tucker, Spencer C., ed.Weapons and Warfare: From Ancient and Medieval Times to the 21st Century (2 vol, ABC-CLIO, 2020).
Tucker, Spencer C., ed. Middle East Conflicts from Ancient Egypt to the 21st Century: An Encyclopedia and Document Collection (4 vol, ABC-CLIO, 2019).
Tucker, Spencer. Encyclopedia of American Military History (2019).

Black, Jeremy. Warfare in the Western World, 1882–1975 (2002), 256 pp.

Historiography and memory

Barnett, Correlli, Shelford Bidwell, Brian Bond, and John Terraine. Old Battles and New Defences: Can We Learn from Military History? (1986). online edition Archived 2009-11-23 at the Wayback Machine
Beaumont, Joan. "Australian military historiography" War & Society 42#1 (2023) pp. 99–121 doi:10.1080/07292473.2023.2150485
Black, Jeremy. "Determinisms and Other Issues", Journal of Military History, 68 (Oct. 2004), 1217–1232. in Project MUSE
Black, Jeremy. Rethinking Military History (2004) online edition Archived 2009-12-08 at the Wayback Machine
Bucholz, Arden. "Hans Delbruck and Modern Military History." The Historian vol 55#3 (1993) pp. 517+.
Chambers II, John Whiteclay. "The New Military History: Myth and Reality", Journal of Military History, 55 (July 1991), 395–406
Chambers, John Whiteclay. "‘All Quiet on the Western Front’ (1930): the antiwar film and the image of the First World War." Historical journal of film, radio and television 14.4 (1994): 377–411.
Charters, David A., Marc Milner, and J. Brent Wilson. eds. Military History and the Military Profession, (1992)
Citino, Robert M. "Military Histories Old and New: A Reintroduction", The American Historical Review Vol. 112, no. 4 (October 2007), pp. 1070–1090 online version Archived 2021-08-27 at the Wayback Machine
Gill, John H. "From Great Captains to Common Grognards: research opportunities in Napoleonic military history." War & Society 41.1 (2022): 6–84. doi:10.1080/07292473.2022.2021752
Grimsley, Mark. "Why Military History Sucks", Nov. 1996, War Historian.org, online at Why Military History Sucks
Higham, John, ed. A Guide to the Sources of British Military History  (2015) 654 pages excerpt
Hughes, Matthew, and W. Philpott, eds. Palgrave Advances in Modern Military History (2006) excerpt Archived 2022-01-16 at the Wayback Machine
Karsten, Peter. "The 'New' American Military History: A Map of the Territory, Explored and Unexplored", American Quarterly, 36 #3, (1984), 389–418 in JSTOR Archived 2019-04-26 at the Wayback Machine
Kimball, Jeffrey. "The Influence of Ideology on Interpretive Disagreement: A Report on a Survey of Diplomatic, Military and Peace Historians on the Causes of 20th Century U. S. Wars", History Teacher 17#3 (1984) pp. 355–384 doi:10.2307/493146 online Archived 2021-11-10 at the Wayback Machine
Kohn, Richard H. "The Social History of the American Soldier: A Review and Prospectus for Research", American Historical Review, 86 (June 1981), 553–67. in JSTOR Archived 2019-04-26 at the Wayback Machine
Lee, Wayne E. "Mind and Matter – Cultural Analysis in American Military History: A Look at the State of the Field", Journal of American History, 93 (March 2007), 1116–1142. Fulltext: History Cooperative and Ebsco
Lynn, John A. "Rally Once Again: The Embattled Future of Academic Military History", Journal of Military History, 61 (Oct. 1997), 777–789.
Mearsheimer, John J. Liddell Hart and the Weight of History. (1988). 234 pp.
Messenger, Charles, ed. Reader's Guide to Military History (Routledge, 2001), 948 pp; detailed guide to the historiography of 500 topics excerpt and text search Archived 2016-03-12 at the Wayback Machine
Morillo, Stephen. What is Military History (2006)
Moyar, Mark. "The Current State of Military History", The Historical Journal (2007), 50: 225–240 online at CJO
Muehlbauer, Matthew S., and David J. Ulbrich, eds. The Routledge History of Global War and Society (2018)  The Routledge History of Global War and Society Archived 2018-04-27 at the Wayback Machine
Muehlbauer, Matthew S., and David J. Ulbrich. Ways of War: American Military History from the Colonial Era to the Twenty-First Century (2018)  Ways of War: American Military History from the Colonial Era to the Twenty-First Century Archived 2018-04-27 at the Wayback Machine
Murray, Williamson and Richard Hart Sinnreich, eds. The Past as Prologue: The Importance of History to the Military Profession (2006).
Noe, Kenneth W., George C. Rable and Carol Reardon. "Battle Histories: Reflections on Civil War Military Studies" Civil War History 53#3 2007. pp. 229+. online edition[permanent dead link]
Porch, Douglas. "Writing History in the 'End of History' Era: Reflections on Historians and the GWOT" Journal of Military History 2006 70(4): 1065–1079. on war on terror, 2001–present
Reardon, Carol. Soldiers and Scholars: The U.S. Army and the Uses of Military History, 1865–1920. U. Press of Kansas 1990. 270 pp. ISBN 978-0700604661.
Reid, Brian Holden. "American Military History: the Need for Comparative Analysis." Journal of American History 2007 93(4): 1154–1157.
Reid, Brian Holden, and Joseph G. Dawson III, eds., "Special Issue: The Vistas of American Military History, 1800–1898", American Nineteenth Century History, 7 (June 2006), 139–321.
Riseman, Noah. "The Rise of Indigenous Military History." History Compass (2014) 12#12 pp. 901–911. cover 20th century. doi:10.1111/hic3.12205.
Rogers, Clifford J. ed. The Military Revolution Debate: Readings On The Military Transformation Of Early Modern Europe (1995)
Sharman, Jason C. "Myths of military revolution: European expansion and Eurocentrism." European Journal of International Relations 24.3 (2018): 491513 online Archived 2022-01-16 at the Wayback Machine
Schleh, Eugene P. "Books About Film and War." Film & History: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Film and Television Studies 8.1 (1978): 11–14.
Schleh, Eugene P. "All Quiet on the Western Front: A History Teacher's Reappraisal." Film & History 8.4 (1978): 66–69.
Spector, Ronald H. "Teetering on the Brink of Respectability." Journal of American History 2007 93(4): 1158–1160. online Archived 2021-07-14 at the Wayback Machine
Spiller, Roger. "Military History and its Fictions." Journal of Military History 2006 70(4): 1081–1097. online
Winter, Jay, and Antoine Prost. The Great War in History Debates and Controversies, 1914 to the Present (Cambridge UP, 2005) excerpt Archived 2021-08-04 at the Wayback Machine
Wolters, Timothy S. "Harvey A. DeWeerd and the Dawn of Academic Military History in the United States." Journal of Military History (Jan 2021) 85#1 pp 95–133.

External links

International Bibliography of Military History of the International Commission of Military History – from Brill.nl
H-WAR, daily discussion group for military historians – from Michigan State University Department of History, H-Net Humanities & Social Sciences Online
Web Sources for Military History – from AmericanHistoryProjects.com
Military History Encyclopedia on the Web

vte

Albania
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
North Macedonia
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom

Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
South Ossetia

vte

Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States

Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands

vte

Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela

Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands

vte

Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Timor-Leste (East Timor)
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen

Abkhazia
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan

British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau

Category
 Asia portal

vte

Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland

Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla  (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)

vte

Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu

Cook Islands
Niue

American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna

vte

Military history
List of military museums

Albigensian Crusade
Catharism debate
Crusades
Islamic views
Eighty Years' War
Origins
Fall of Babylon
Gallic Wars
Late Bronze Age collapse
Dorian invasion
Sea Peoples
Peloponnesian War

Catharism debate

Islamic views

Origins

Dorian invasion
Sea Peoples

French Revolution
Pre-revolution [fr]
Causes
New Russian School [ru]
War in the Vendée
Napoleonic era
Invasion of Russia
Waterloo

Pre-revolution [fr]
Causes
New Russian School [ru]

Invasion of Russia
Waterloo

American Civil War
Origins
Turning point
Franco-Prussian War
Causes
Paris Commune
Great Game
Indian Rebellion of 1857
Causes
Paraguayan War
War of 1812
Origins
War of the Pacific
Causes
Myth of English aid [es]

Origins
Turning point

Causes
Paris Commune

Causes

Origins

Causes
Myth of English aid [es]

Reparations
War guilt question
Article 231
Reichstag inquiry

Article 231
Reichstag inquiry

Burning of Smyrna
Polish–Soviet War
Causes
Spanish Civil War
Background

Causes

Background

Causes
"Blitzkrieg" concept
Broad vs. narrow front
German resistance to Nazism
Nazi foreign policy debate

Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact
Soviet offensive plans
Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising
Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia
Winter War
Background
Spirit

Background
Spirit

Auschwitz bombing debate
Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe
Functionalism–intentionalism debate
In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba
Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust
Pius Wars
"Polish death camp"
Responsibility
Slovakia
Uniqueness

Pius Wars

Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
"Battle for Australia"
Bengal famine
Second Sino-Japanese War
Nanjing Massacre

Nanjing Massacre

Battle of France
Guilty Men
Résistancialisme
Vichy France

Origins
1948 Palestine war
Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba
Zionism as settler colonialism
New Historians
Malayan Emergency
Causes
Algerian War
Six-Day War
Origins
Iranian revolution
Causes
Iran–Iraq War
Falklands War
Sovereignty dispute
Sri Lankan civil war
Origins

Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba
Zionism as settler colonialism
New Historians

Causes

Origins

Causes

Sovereignty dispute

Origins

Russo-Georgian War
Background
Responsibility
Syrian revolution
Causes

Background
Responsibility

Causes

Conflict thesis
Gunpowder and gun transmission
Torsion mangonel myth
War and genocide

Category

vte

Military
Service
History
Technology
Occupational roles
Recruitment
National security
Roles:
Soldier
Sailor
Airman
Enlisted rank
Officer
Commanding officer
Executive officer

Protocols and structure:
Ranks
List
Uniforms
Awards and decorations
By country
Highest
Categories:
Ranks

List

By country
Highest

Command and control
Defense ministry
Armed Forces:
Army
Navy
Air force
Marines
Space force
Special forces
Airborne forces
Commando
Frogman
Militia
Reserves
Functional specialties:
Communications
Engineers
Intelligence
Reconnaissance
List
Medical
Military police
Gendarmerie
Security forces
Border guard
Coast guard
Logistics
By country
Categories:
Combat occupations
Development:
Basic training
Military maneuvers
Combat training

List

By country

Land units:
Combat arms
Infantry
Armor
Cavalry
Artillery
Special reconnaissance
Signal corps
Naval units:
Warships
Surface
Littoral
Patrol
Submarines
Aircraft carriers
Landing craft
Auxiliary ship
Air units:
Fighters
Bombers
Command
Close air support
Electronic-warfare
Reconnaissance

Cavalry

Surface
Littoral
Patrol

Organization
By country
Armies by country
Chain of command
Unified combatant command
General staff
Land:
Army group
Field army
Corps
List
Division
List
Brigade
By type
Regiment
By country
By type
Battalion
By country
By type
Platoon
Squad
Naval:
Naval fleet
Task force
Carrier strike group
Division
Flotilla
Squadron
Air:
Combat box
Special units by nation:
Battle Fleet; U.S. Navy
Front; Russian land forces

By country
Armies by country

List

List

By type

By country
By type

By country
By type

Ground:
Ground
List
Combat
Tracked vehicles
Wheeled vehicles
Armor
Tank
Infantry fighting vehicle
Lists
By country
Armored car
Scout car
Truck
List
Gun truck
Self-propelled artillery
List
Anti-aircraft
Rail

List

Tank
Infantry fighting vehicle
Lists
By country

List
Gun truck

List
Anti-aircraft

Weapons
List
Artillery:
Artillery
List
By country
Battery
Field gun
List
Howitzer
List
Rocket
List
Infantry guns:
Pistols
Machine guns
List
Service rifles:
Battle rifles
List
Assault rifle
List
Sniper rifle
Other infantry weapons:
Bazooka
Anti-tank gun
List
Grenade
List
Flamethrower
Bayonet
Combat knife
List
Missiles:
Shoulder-fired
Anti-tank
List
By country
Mortar
Lists:
Infantry
Heavy
Other:
Land mine
Shells

List

List
By country
Battery

List

List

List

List

List

List

List

List

List

Shoulder-fired
Anti-tank
List
By country

Lists:
Infantry
Heavy

Guided missiles
List
Naval:
Naval artillery
List
Anti-ship missiles
Torpedoes
Depth charges
Close-in weapons
Aerial:
Guns
Missiles
Bombs

List

List

Military equipment
Lists
By country
Helmet
List
Camouflage
List
Body armor
Facilities:
Military base
Lists
Field hospital

Lists
By country

List

List

Lists

Fire-control system
Fire-control radar
Director (military)
Combat information center
Sonar
Radar
Historical:
Ship gun fire-control
Gun data computer
Torpedo Data Computer

War
Battle
Strategy
Tactics
Combat
Military science
Diplomacy
International law
By era:
Prehistoric
Ancient
Post-classical
Early modern
Late modern
industrial
fourth-gen
By type:
Armoured warfare
Artillery
Barrage
Biological
Camouflage
Cavalry
Chemical
Class
Combined arms
Conventional
Cyber
Denial
Disinformation
Drone
Electronic
Infantry
Lawfare
Loitering
Music
Nuclear
Psychological
Radiological
Unconventional

industrial
fourth-gen

Aerospace
Air
Airborne
Space
Land
Cold-region
Desert
Jungle
Mountain
Urban
Sea
Amphibious
Blue
Brown
Green
Surface
Underwater
Subterranean
Tunnel
Cyber
Information

Air
Airborne
Space

Cold-region
Desert
Jungle
Mountain
Urban

Amphibious
Blue
Brown
Green
Surface
Underwater

Tunnel

List of military tactics
Aerial
Airlift
Airbridge
Airdrop
Battle
Cavalry
Charge
Counterattack
Counterinsurgency
Defeat in detail
Foxhole
Envelopment
Guerrilla
Morale
Rapid dominance
Siege
Swarming
Tactical objective
Target saturation
Trench
Withdrawal

Airbridge
Airdrop

Military operation
Operations research
Blitzkrieg
Expeditionary
Deep operation
Maneuver
Operational manoeuvre group

List of military strategies and concepts
Military campaign
Attrition
Counter-offensive
Culminating
Defence in depth
Fabian
Mosaic
Deception
Defensive
Depth
Goal
Naval
Offensive
Scorched earth

Diplomacy:
Alliances
Peace treaty
Cooperation
Deterrence theory
United Nations
Mediation
Public policy:
Conscription
Defense budget
List
Past
Per capita
Defense policy
Related:
Government
Nation

List
Past
Per capita

Military lists
Wars
Weapons
Military tactics
History lists:
Wars
Battles
Military occupations
Operations
Sieges
Related lists:
War crimes
Writers

{{War}}
{{Weapons}}
{{Ranks}}
Vehicles and weapons
{{Tanks}}
{{Weapons}}
{{Infantry fighting vehicles}}
{{Modern warships}}
{{Aircraft}}
Specific modern wars
{{Napoleonic Wars}}
{{World War I}}
{{World War II}}
{{Cold War}}

{{Tanks}}
{{Weapons}}
{{Infantry fighting vehicles}}
{{Modern warships}}
{{Aircraft}}

{{Napoleonic Wars}}
{{World War I}}
{{World War II}}
{{Cold War}}

Lists of wars by country
Conflicts by time

Peace
Peace and conflict studies
Peace movement
Peace process
Disarmament
Pacifism
Détente
Global studies
Conscientious objector
Anti-war movement
Idealism in international relations
Humanitarianism
International cooperation
Crimes against humanity
{{International relations}}
Categories:
Peace organizations

vte

Outline
History
Index

Anthropology
archaeology
cultural
social
physical
Economics
microeconomics
macroeconomics
econometrics
mathematical
Geography
physical
human
technical
integrated
History
cultural
auxiliary sciences
economic
human
military
political
social
Law
jurisprudence
legal history
legal systems
public law
private law
Linguistics
semiotics
Political science
international relations
comparative
philosophy
public policy
public administration
Psychology
abnormal
cognitive
developmental
personality
social
Sociology
criminology
demography
internet
rural
urban

archaeology
cultural
social
physical

microeconomics
macroeconomics
econometrics
mathematical

physical
human
technical
integrated

cultural
auxiliary sciences
economic
human
military
political
social

jurisprudence
legal history
legal systems
public law
private law

semiotics

international relations
comparative
philosophy
public policy
public administration

abnormal
cognitive
developmental
personality
social

criminology
demography
internet
rural
urban

Administration
business
public
Anthrozoology
Area studies
Business studies
Cognitive science
Communication studies
Community studies
Criminology
Critical animal studies
Cultural studies
Development studies
Education
Environmental
social science
studies
Food studies
Gender studies
Global studies
Historical sociology
History of technology
Human ecology
Information science
International studies
Linguistics
Management
Media studies
Philosophies
science
 economics
history
psychology
social science
Planning
land use
regional
urban
Political ecology
Political economy
Political sociology
Public health
Regional science
Science and technology studies
Science studies
historical
Quantum social science
Social work
Vegan studies

business
public

social science
studies

science
 economics
history
psychology
social science

land use
regional
urban

historical
Quantum social science

List of social science journals

Behavioral sciences
Geisteswissenschaft
Human science
Humanities

Category
 Commons
 Society portal
 Wikiversity

GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataCzech RepublicSpainLatviaIsrael

Historical Dictionary of SwitzerlandNARAEncyclopedia of Modern Ukraine

The beautiful gameThe World's Game[1][2]

Team sportball game

Association football, more commonly known as football or soccer,[a] is a team sport played between two teams of 11 players who almost exclusively use their feet to propel a ball around a rectangular field called a pitch. The objective of the game is to score more goals than the opposing team by moving the ball beyond the goal line into a rectangular-framed goal defended by the opposing team. Traditionally, the game has been played over two 45-minute halves, for a total match time of 90 minutes. With an estimated 250 million players active in over 200 countries and territories, it is the world's most popular sport.

Association football is played in accordance with the Laws of the Game, a set of rules that has been in effect since 1863 and maintained by the IFAB since 1886. The game is played with a football that is 68–70 cm (27–28 in) in circumference. The two teams compete to score goals by getting the ball into the other team's goal (between the posts, under the bar, and fully across the goal line). When the ball is in play, the players mainly use their feet, but may also use any other part of their body, except for their hands or arms, to control, strike, or pass the ball; the head, chest, and thighs are commonly used. Only the goalkeepers may use their hands and arms, and that only within the penalty area. The team that has scored more goals at the end of the game is the winner. Depending on the format of the competition, an equal number of goals scored may result in a draw being declared with 1 point awarded to each team, or the game may go into extra time or a penalty shoot-out.[5]

Internationally, association football is governed by FIFA. Under FIFA, there are six continental confederations: AFC, CAF, CONCACAF, CONMEBOL, OFC, and UEFA. National associations (e.g. the FA in England, U.S. Soccer in the United States, etc.) are responsible for managing the game in their own countries both professionally and at an amateur level, and coordinating competitions in accordance with the Laws of the Game. The most prestigious senior international competition is the FIFA World Cup. The men's World Cup is the most-viewed sporting event in the world, surpassing the Olympic Games.[6] The most prestigious competition in European club football is the UEFA Champions League, which attracts an extensive television audience worldwide. The final of the men's Champions League is the most-watched annual sporting event in the world.[7][8]

Name

Association football is part of a family of football codes that emerged from various ball games played worldwide since antiquity. The word "association" in this term refers to the Football Association (the FA), founded in London in 1863, which published the first set of rules for the sport that same year.[9] The term was coined to distinguish the type of football played in accordance with the FA rules from other types that were gaining popularity at the time, particularly rugby football.[10]

The term soccer comes from Oxford "-er" slang, which was prevalent at the University of Oxford in England from about 1875, and is thought to have been borrowed from the slang of Rugby School. Initially spelt assoccer (a shortening of "association"), it was later reduced to the modern spelling.[11][12] Early alternative spellings included socca and socker.[10] This form of slang also gave rise to rugger for rugby football, fiver and tenner for five pound and ten pound notes, and the now-archaic footer that was also a name for association football.[13]

Within the English-speaking world, association football is now usually called simply "football" in Great Britain and most of Ulster in the north of Ireland,[14] whereas people usually call it "soccer" in regions and countries where other codes of football are prevalent, such as Australia,[15] Canada, South Africa, most of Ireland (excluding Ulster),[16] and the United States. A notable exception is New Zealand, where in the first two decades of the 21st century, under the influence of international television, "football" has been gaining prevalence, despite the dominance of other codes of football, namely rugby union and rugby league.[17]

History

Kicking ball games arose independently multiple times across multiple cultures.[b] The Chinese competitive game cuju (蹴鞠, literally "kickball"; also known as tsu chu) resembles modern association football as well as a mix of basketball and volleyball.[19][20] This is the earliest form of a kicking game for which there is historical evidence. The game was first recorded as in exercise in the Zhan Guo Ce, a military history from the Han dynasty.[21] Cuju players would pass the ball around, having to avoid it touching the ground at any point. It was then passed to a designated player, who attempted to kick it through the fengliu yan, a circular goal atop 10–11 meter poles.[19] During the Han dynasty (206 BCE – 220 CE), cuju games were standardised and rules were established.[22] The Silk Road facilitated the transmission of cuju outside of China, especially the form of the game popular in the Tang dynasty, the period when the inflatable ball was invented and replaced the stuffed ball.[23] Other East Asian games include kemari in Japan and chuk-guk in Korea, both influenced by cuju.[24][25] Kemari originated after the year 600 during the Asuka period. It was a ceremonial rather than a competitive game, and involved the kicking of a mari, a ball made of animal skin.[26] In North America, pasuckuakohowog was a ball game played by the Algonquians; it was described as "almost identical to the kind of folk football being played in Europe at the same time, in which the ball was kicked through goals".[27]

Phaininda and episkyros were Greek ball games.[21][28] An image of an episkyros player depicted in low relief on a stele of c. 375–400 BCE in the National Archaeological Museum of Athens[18] appears on the UEFA European Championship trophy.[29] Athenaeus, writing in 228 CE, mentions the Roman ball game harpastum. Phaininda, episkyros and harpastum were played involving hands and violence. They all appear to have resembled rugby football, wrestling, and volleyball more than what is recognisable as modern football.[22][30][31][32][33][34]

In the Middle Ages, one notable game with similarities to modern football was calcio storico fiorentino, which originated in Florence, Italy.[35] Another medieval sport that can be considered a form of early football is la soule (or choule), played in France from the 12th century,[36] in which the ball was propelled by hands, feet, and sticks.[37] As with pre-codified mob football, the antecedent of all modern football codes, these medieval games involved more handling of the ball than kicking it.[38][3]

Association football in itself does not have a classical history.[29] Notwithstanding any similarities to other ball games played around the world, FIFA has described that no historical connection exists with any game played in antiquity outside Europe.[3] The history of football in England dates back to at least the eighth century.[39] The modern rules of association football are based on the mid-19th century efforts to standardise the widely varying forms of football played in the public schools of England.[40]

The Cambridge rules, first drawn up at the University of Cambridge in 1848, were particularly influential in the development of subsequent codes, including association football. The Cambridge rules were written at Trinity College, Cambridge, at a meeting attended by representatives from Eton, Harrow, Rugby, Winchester and Shrewsbury schools. They were not universally adopted. During the 1850s, many clubs unconnected to schools or universities were formed throughout the English-speaking world to play various forms of football. Some came up with their own distinct codes of rules, most notably the Sheffield Football Club, formed by former public school pupils in 1857,[41] which led to the formation of a Sheffield FA in 1867. In 1862, John Charles Thring of Uppingham School also devised an influential set of rules.[42]

These ongoing efforts contributed to the formation of the Football Association (the FA) in 1863, which first met on the morning of 26 October 1863 at the Freemasons' Tavern in Great Queen Street, London.[43] The only school to be represented on this occasion was Charterhouse. The Freemasons' Tavern was the setting for five more meetings of the FA between October and December 1863; the English FA eventually issued the first comprehensive set of rules named Laws of the Game, forming modern football.[9] The laws included bans on running with the ball in hand and hacking (kicking an opponent in the shins), tripping and holding.[44] Eleven clubs, under the charge of FA secretary Ebenezer Cobb Morley, ratified the original thirteen laws of the game.[43] The sticking point was hacking, which a twelfth club at the meeting, Blackheath FC, had wanted to keep, resulting in their withdrawal from the FA.[43] Other English rugby clubs followed this lead and did not join the FA, and instead in 1871, along with Blackheath, formed the Rugby Football Union. The 1863 FA rules included handling of the ball by "marks" and the lack of a crossbar, making the game remarkably similar to Victorian rules football, which was being developed around the same time in Australia. The Sheffield FA played by its own rules until the 1870s, with the FA absorbing some of its rules until there was little difference between the games.[45]

The world's oldest football competition is the FA Cup, which was founded by the footballer and cricketer Charles W. Alcock, and has been contested by English teams since 1872. The first official international football match also took place in 1872, between Scotland and England in Glasgow, again at the instigation of Alcock. England is also home to the world's first football league, which was founded in Birmingham in 1888 by Aston Villa director William McGregor.[46] The original format contained 12 clubs from the Midlands and Northern England.[47]

The Laws of the Game are determined by the International Football Association Board (IFAB).[48] The board was formed in 1886[49] after a meeting in Manchester of the Football Association, the Scottish Football Association, the Football Association of Wales, and the Irish Football Association. FIFA, the international football body, was formed in Paris in 1904 and declared that they would adhere to the Laws of the Game of the Football Association.[50] The growing popularity of the international game led to the admittance of FIFA representatives to the IFAB in 1913. The board consists of four representatives from FIFA and one representative from each of the four British associations.[51]

For most of the 20th century, Europe and South America were the dominant regions in association football. The FIFA World Cup, inaugurated in 1930, became the main stage for players of both continents to show their worth and the strength of their national teams.[52] In the second half of the century, the European Cup and the Copa Libertadores were created, and the champions of these two club competitions would contest the Intercontinental Cup to prove which team was the best in the world.[53]

In the 21st century, South America has continued to produce some of the best footballers in the world,[54] but its clubs have fallen behind the still dominant European clubs, which often sign the best players from Latin America and elsewhere.[52][54] Meanwhile, football has improved in Africa, Asia and North America,[54] and nowadays, these regions are at least on equal grounds with South America in club football.[55] When it comes to national teams, countries in the Caribbean and Oceania regions (excluding Australia) have yet to make a mark in international football,[56][57] while Europeans and South Americans continue to dominate the men's FIFA World Cup, as no team from any other region has managed to even reach the final.[52][54]

Football is played at a professional level all over the world. Millions of people regularly go to football stadiums to follow their favourite teams,[58] while billions more watch the game on television or on the internet.[59][60] A very large number of people also play football at an amateur level. According to a survey conducted by FIFA published in 2001, over 240 million people from more than 200 countries regularly play football.[61] Football has the highest global television audience in sport.[62]

In many parts of the world, football evokes great passions and plays an important role in the life of individual fans, local communities, and even nations. Ryszard Kapuściński says that Europeans who are polite, modest, or humble fall easily into rage when playing or watching football games.[63] The Ivory Coast national football team helped secure a truce to the nation's civil war in 2006[64] and it helped further reduce tensions between government and rebel forces in 2007 by playing a match in the rebel capital of Bouaké, an occasion that brought both armies together peacefully for the first time.[65] By contrast, football is widely considered to have been the final proximate cause for the Football War in June 1969 between El Salvador and Honduras.[66] The sport also exacerbated tensions at the beginning of the Croatian War of Independence of the 1990s, when a match between Dinamo Zagreb and Red Star Belgrade degenerated into rioting in May 1990.[67]

Women's association football

Women's association football has historically seen opposition, with national associations severely curbing its development and several outlawing it completely. Nevertheless, women have been playing football and similar games for as long as such games have existed. Frescoes from the Han dynasty (25–220 CE) depict female figures playing the ancient Chinese game cuju.[68][69] There are also reports of annual football matches played by women in Midlothian, Scotland, during the 1790s.[70][71]

There is documented evidence of women's early involvement in the modern game of association football.[71][72] The first match recorded by the Scottish Football Association took place in 1892 in Glasgow.[70] In England, the first recorded game of football between women took place in 1895.[72] Women's football has traditionally been associated with charity games and physical exercise, particularly in the United Kingdom.[73]

Association football continued to be played by women since the time of the first recorded women's games in the late 19th century.[73][74] The best-documented early European team was founded by activist Nettie Honeyball in England in 1894. It was named the British Ladies' Football Club. Honeyball is quoted as, "I founded the association late last year [1894], with the fixed resolve of proving to the world that women are not the 'ornamental and useless' creatures men have pictured. I must confess, my convictions on all matters where the sexes are so widely divided are all on the side of emancipation, and I look forward to the time when ladies may sit in Parliament and have a voice in the direction of affairs, especially those which concern them most".[75] Honeyball and those like her paved the way for women's football. However, the women's game was frowned upon by the British football associations and continued without their support. It has been suggested that this was motivated by a perceived threat to the "masculinity" of the game.[76]

Women's football became popular on a large scale at the time of the First World War, when female employment in heavy industry spurred the growth of the game, much as it had done for men 50 years earlier. The most successful team of the era was Dick, Kerr Ladies F.C. of Preston, England. The team played in one of the first women's international matches against a French XI team in 1920,[77][78] and also made up most of the England team against a Scottish Ladies XI in the same year, winning 22–0.[70]

Despite being more popular than some men's football events, with one match seeing a 53,000 strong crowd in 1920,[79][80] women's football in England suffered a blow in 1921 when the Football Association outlawed the playing of the game on association members' pitches,[81] stating that "the game of football is quite unsuitable for females and should not be encouraged".[82] Players and football writers have argued that this ban was, in fact, due to envy of the large crowds that women's matches attracted,[80] and because the FA had no control over the money made from the women's game.[82] The FA ban led to the formation of the short-lived English Ladies Football Association and play moved to rugby grounds.[83] Women's football also faced bans in several other countries, notably in Brazil from 1941 to 1979,[84] in France from 1941 to 1970,[85] and in West Germany from 1955 to 1970.[86]

Restrictions began to be reduced in the 1960s and 1970s. The Italian women's football league was established in 1968.[87] In December 1969, the Women's Football Association was formed in England,[73][88] with the sport eventually becoming the most prominent team sport for women in the United Kingdom.[73] Two unofficial women's World Cups were organised by the FIEFF in 1970 and in 1971. Also in 1971, UEFA members voted to officially recognise women's football,[73] while the Football Association rescinded the ban that prohibited women from playing on association members' pitches in England.[88]

Women's football still faces many struggles, but its worldwide growth[89] has seen major competitions being launched at both the national and international levels, mirroring the men's competitions. The FIFA Women's World Cup was inaugurated in 1991: the first tournament was held in China, featuring 12 teams from the respective six confederations. The World Cup has been held every four years since;[90] by 2019, it had expanded to 24 national teams, and 1.12 billion viewers watched the competition.[91] Four years later, FIFA targeted the 32-team 2023 Women's World Cup at an audience of 2 billion,[92] while about 1.4 million tickets were sold, setting a Women's World Cup record.[93] Women's football has been an Olympic event since 1996.[94]

North America is the dominant region in women's football, with the United States winning the most FIFA Women's World Cups[95] and Olympic tournaments. Europe and Asia come second and third in terms of international success,[96][97] and the women's game has been improving in South America.[98]

Gameplay

Association football is played in accordance with a set of rules known as the Laws of the Game. The game is played using a spherical ball of 68–70 cm (27–28 in) circumference,[99] known as the football (or soccer ball). Two teams of eleven players each compete to get the ball into the other team's goal (between the posts and under the bar), thereby scoring a goal. There are situations where a goal can be disallowed, such as an offside call or a foul in the build-up to the goal. The team that has scored more goals at the end of the game is the winner; if both teams have scored an equal number of goals then the game is a draw. Each team is led by a captain who has only one official responsibility as mandated by the Laws of the Game: to represent their team in the coin toss before kick-off or penalty kicks.[5]

The primary law is that players other than goalkeepers may not deliberately handle the ball with their hands or arms during play, though they must use both their hands during a throw-in restart. Although players usually use their feet to move the ball around, they may use any part of their body (notably, "heading" with the forehead)[100] other than their hands or arms.[101] Within normal play, all players are free to play the ball in any direction and move throughout the pitch, though players may not pass to teammates who are in an offside position.[102]

During gameplay, players attempt to create goal-scoring opportunities through individual control of the ball, such as by dribbling, passing the ball to a teammate, and by taking shots at the goal, which is guarded by the opposing goalkeeper. Opposing players may try to regain control of the ball by intercepting a pass or through tackling the opponent in possession of the ball; however, physical contact between opponents is restricted. Football is generally a free-flowing game, with play stopping only when the ball has left the field of play or when play is stopped by the referee for an infringement of the rules. After a stoppage, play recommences with a specified restart.[103]

At a professional level, most matches produce only a few goals. For example, the 2022–23 season of the English Premier League produced an average of 2.85 goals per match.[104] The Laws of the Game do not specify any player positions other than goalkeeper,[105] but a number of specialised roles have evolved.[106] Broadly, these include three main categories: strikers, or forwards, whose main task is to score goals; defenders, who specialise in preventing their opponents from scoring; and midfielders, who dispossess the opposition and keep possession of the ball to pass it to the forwards on their team. Players in these positions are referred to as outfield players, to distinguish them from the goalkeeper.[107]

These positions are further subdivided according to the area of the field in which the player spends the most time. For example, there are central defenders and left and right midfielders. The ten outfield players may be arranged in any combination. The number of players in each position determines the style of the team's play; more forwards and fewer defenders creates a more aggressive and offensive-minded game, while the reverse creates a slower, more defensive style of play. While players typically spend most of the game in a specific position, there are few restrictions on player movement, and players can switch positions at any time.[108] The layout of a team's players is known as a formation. Defining the team's formation and tactics is usually the prerogative of the team's manager.[109]

Laws

There are 17 laws in the official Laws of the Game, each containing a collection of stipulations and guidelines. The same laws are designed to apply to all levels of football for both sexes, although certain modifications for groups such as juniors, seniors and people with physical disabilities are permitted.[c] The laws are often framed in broad terms, which allow flexibility in their application depending on the nature of the game. The Laws of the Game are published by FIFA, but are maintained by the IFAB.[110] In addition to the seventeen laws, numerous IFAB decisions and other directives contribute to the regulation of association football.[111][112] Within the United States, Major League Soccer used a distinct ruleset during the 1990s,[113] and the NFHS and NCAA still use rulesets that are comparable to, but different from, the IFAB Laws.[114]

Players, equipment, and officials

Each team consists of a maximum of eleven players (excluding substitutes), one of whom must be the goalkeeper. Competition rules may state a minimum number of players required to constitute a team, which is usually seven. Goalkeepers are the only players allowed to play the ball with their hands or arms, provided they do so within the penalty area in front of their own goal. Though there are a variety of positions in which the outfield (non-goalkeeper) players are strategically placed by a coach, these positions are not defined or required by the Laws.[105]

The basic equipment or kit players are required to wear includes a shirt, shorts, socks, footwear and adequate shin guards. An athletic supporter and protective cup is highly recommended for male players by medical experts and professionals.[115][116] Headgear is not a required piece of basic equipment, but players today may choose to wear it to protect themselves from head injury.[117] Players are forbidden to wear or use anything that is dangerous to themselves or another player, such as jewellery or watches. The goalkeeper must wear clothing that is easily distinguishable from that worn by the other players and the match officials.[118]

A number of players may be replaced by substitutes during the course of the game. The maximum number of substitutions permitted in most competitive international and domestic league games is five in 90 minutes,[119] with each team being allowed one more if the game should go into extra-time; the permitted number may vary in other competitions or in friendly matches. Common reasons for a substitution include injury, tiredness, ineffectiveness, a tactical switch, or timewasting at the end of a finely poised game. In standard adult matches, a player who has been substituted may not take further part in a match.[120] IFAB recommends "that a match should not continue if there are fewer than seven players in either team". Any decision regarding points awarded for abandoned games is left to the individual football associations.[121]

A game is officiated by a referee, who has "full authority to enforce the Laws of the Game in connection with the match to which he has been appointed" (Law 5), and whose decisions are final. The referee is assisted by two assistant referees. In many high-level games there is also a fourth official who assists the referee and may replace another official should the need arise.[122]

Goal line technology is used to measure if the whole ball has crossed the goal-line thereby determining whether a goal has been scored or not; this was brought in to prevent controversy. Video assistant referees (VAR) have also been increasingly introduced in high-level matches to assist officials through video replays to correct clear and obvious mistakes. There are four types of calls that can be reviewed: mistaken identity in awarding a red or yellow card, goals and whether there was a violation during the build-up, direct red card decisions, and penalty decisions.[123]

Ball

The ball is spherical with a circumference of between 68 and 70 cm (27 and 28 in), a weight in the range of 410 to 450 g (14 to 16 oz), and a pressure between 0.6 and 1.1 standard atmospheres (8.5 and 15.6 pounds per square inch) at sea level. In the past the ball was made up of leather panels sewn together, with a latex bladder for pressurisation, but modern balls at all levels of the game are now synthetic.[124][125]

Pitch

As the Laws were formulated in England, and were initially administered solely by the four British football associations within IFAB, the standard dimensions of a football pitch were originally expressed in imperial units. The Laws now express dimensions with approximate metric equivalents (followed by traditional units in brackets), though use of imperial units remains popular in English-speaking countries with a relatively recent history of metrication (or only partial metrication), such as Britain.[126]

The length of the pitch, or field, for international adult matches is in the range of 100–110 m (110–120 yd) and the width is in the range of 64–75 m (70–80 yd). Fields for non-international matches may be 90–120 m (100–130 yd) in length and 45–90 m (50–100 yd) in width, provided the pitch does not become square. In 2008, the IFAB initially approved a fixed size of 105 m (115 yd) long and 68 m (74 yd) wide as a standard pitch dimension for international matches;[127] however, this decision was later put on hold and was never actually implemented.[128]

The longer boundary lines are touchlines, while the shorter boundaries (on which the goals are placed) are goal lines. A rectangular goal is positioned on each goal line, midway between the two touchlines.[129] The inner edges of the vertical goal posts must be 7.32 m (24 ft) apart, and the lower edge of the horizontal crossbar supported by the goal posts must be 2.44 m (8 ft) above the ground. Nets are usually placed behind the goal, but are not required by the Laws.[130]

In front of the goal is the penalty area. This area is marked by the goal line, two lines starting on the goal line 16.5 m (18 yd) from the goalposts and extending 16.5 m (18 yd) into the pitch perpendicular to the goal line, and a line joining them. This area has a number of functions, the most prominent being to mark where the goalkeeper may handle the ball and where a penalty foul by a member of the defending team becomes punishable by a penalty kick. Other markings define the position of the ball or players at kick-offs, goal kicks, penalty kicks and corner kicks.[131]

Duration and tie-breaking methods

A standard adult football match consists of two halves of 45 minutes each. Each half runs continuously, meaning that the clock is not stopped when the ball is out of play. There is usually a 15-minute half-time break between halves. The end of the match is known as full-time.[132] The referee is the official timekeeper for the match, and may make an allowance for time lost through substitutions, injured players requiring attention, or other stoppages. This added time is called "additional time" in FIFA documents,[133][134] but is most commonly referred to as stoppage time or injury time, while lost time can also be used as a synonym. The duration of stoppage time is at the sole discretion of the referee. Stoppage time does not fully compensate for the time in which the ball is out of play, and a 90-minute game typically involves about an hour of "effective playing time".[135][136] The referee alone signals the end of the match. In matches where a fourth official is appointed, towards the end of the half, the referee signals how many minutes of stoppage time they intend to add. The fourth official then informs the players and spectators by holding up a board showing this number. The signalled stoppage time may be further extended by the referee.[132] Added time was introduced because of an incident in 1891 during a match between Stoke and Aston Villa. Trailing 1–0 with two minutes remaining, Stoke were awarded a penalty kick. Villa's goalkeeper deliberately kicked the ball far out of play; by the time it was recovered, the clock had run out and the game was over, leaving Stoke unable to attempt the penalty.[137] The same law also states that the duration of either half is extended until a penalty kick to be taken or retaken is completed; thus, no game can end with an uncompleted penalty.[138]

In league competitions, games may end in a draw. In knockout competitions where a winner is required, various methods may be employed to break such a deadlock; some competitions may invoke replays.[139] A game tied at the end of regulation time may go into extra time, which consists of two further 15-minute periods. If the score is still tied after extra time, some competitions allow the use of penalty shoot-outs (previously known in the Laws of the Game as "kicks from the penalty mark")[140] to determine which team will progress to the next stage of the tournament or be the champion. Goals scored during extra time periods count towards the final score of the game, but kicks from the penalty mark are only used to decide the team that progresses to the next part of the tournament, with goals scored in a penalty shoot-out not making up part of the final score.[5]

In competitions using two-legged matches, each team competes at home once, with an aggregate score from the two matches deciding which team progresses. Where aggregates are equal, the away goals rule may be used to determine the winners, in which case the winner is the team that scored the most goals in the leg they played away from home. If the result is still equal, extra time and potentially a penalty shoot-out are required.[5]

Ball in and out of play

Under the Laws, the two basic states of play during a game are ball in play and ball out of play. From the beginning of each playing period with a kick-off until the end of the playing period, the ball is in play at all times, except when either the ball leaves the field of play, or play is stopped by the referee. When the ball becomes out of play, play is restarted by one of eight restart methods depending on how it went out of play:

Kick-off: following a goal by the opposing team, or to begin each period of play.[103]
Throw-in: when the ball has crossed the touchline; awarded to the opposing team to that which last touched the ball.[141]
Goal kick: when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the attacking team; awarded to defending team.[142]
Corner kick: when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the defending team; awarded to attacking team.[143]
Indirect free kick: awarded to the opposing team following "non-penal" fouls, certain technical infringements, or when play is stopped to caution or dismiss an opponent without a specific foul having occurred. A goal may not be scored directly (without the ball first touching another player) from an indirect free kick.[144]
Direct free kick: awarded to fouled team following certain listed "penal" fouls.[144] A goal may be scored directly from a direct free kick.
Penalty kick: awarded to the fouled team following a foul usually punishable by a direct free kick but that has occurred within their opponent's penalty area.[145]
Dropped-ball: occurs when the referee has stopped play for any other reason, such as a serious injury to a player, interference by an external party, or a ball becoming defective.[103]

Misconduct

A foul occurs when a player commits an offence listed in the Laws of the Game while the ball is in play. The offences that constitute a foul are listed in Law 12. Handling the ball deliberately, tripping an opponent, or pushing an opponent, are examples of "penal fouls", punishable by a direct free kick or penalty kick depending on where the offence occurred. Other fouls are punishable by an indirect free kick.[101]

The referee may punish a player's or substitute's misconduct by a caution (yellow card) or dismissal (red card). A second yellow card in the same game leads to a red card, which results in a dismissal. A player given a yellow card is said to have been "booked", the referee writing the player's name in their official notebook. If a player has been dismissed, no substitute can be brought on in their place and the player may not participate in further play. Misconduct may occur at any time, and while the offences that constitute misconduct are listed, the definitions are broad. In particular, the offence of "unsporting behaviour" may be used to deal with most events that violate the spirit of the game, even if they are not listed as specific offences. A referee can show a yellow or red card to a player, substitute, substituted player, and to non-players such as managers and support staff.[101][146]

Rather than stopping play, the referee may allow play to continue if doing so will benefit the team against which an offence has been committed. This is known as "playing an advantage".[147] The referee may "call back" play and penalise the original offence if the anticipated advantage does not ensue within "a few seconds". Even if an offence is not penalised due to advantage being played, the offender may still be sanctioned for misconduct at the next stoppage of play.[148]

The referee's decision in all on-pitch matters is considered final. The score of a match cannot be altered after the game, even if later evidence shows that decisions (including whether a goal was awarded or not) were incorrect.[149]

Along with the general administration of the sport, football associations and competition organisers also enforce good conduct in wider aspects of the game, dealing with issues such as comments to the press, clubs' financial management, doping, age fraud and match fixing. Most competitions enforce mandatory suspensions for players who are sent off in a game.[150] Some on-field incidents, if considered very serious (such as allegations of racial abuse), may result in competitions deciding to impose heavier sanctions than those normally associated with a red card.[d] Some associations allow for appeals against player suspensions incurred on-field if clubs feel a referee was incorrect or unduly harsh.[150]

Sanctions for such infractions may be levied on individuals or on clubs as a whole. Penalties may include fines, point deductions (in league competitions) or even expulsion from competitions. For example, the English Football League deduct 12 points from any team that enters financial administration.[151] Among other administrative sanctions are penalties against game forfeiture. Teams that forfeit a game or are forfeited against are awarded a technical loss or win.[152]

Governing bodies

The recognised international governing body of football (and associated games, such as futsal and beach soccer)[c] is FIFA. The FIFA headquarters are located in Zürich, Switzerland. Six regional confederations are associated with FIFA; these are:[153]

Asia: Asian Football Confederation (AFC)
Africa: Confederation of African Football (CAF)
Europe: Union of European Football Associations (UEFA)
North/Central America & Caribbean: Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF)
Oceania: Oceania Football Confederation (OFC)
South America: Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol (South American Football Confederation; CONMEBOL)

National associations (or national federations) oversee football within individual countries. These are generally synonymous with sovereign states (for example, the Cameroonian Football Federation in Cameroon), but also include a smaller number of associations responsible for sub-national entities or autonomous regions (for example, the Scottish Football Association in Scotland). 211 national associations are affiliated both with FIFA and with their respective continental confederations.[153] Other national associations may be members of continental confederations but otherwise not participate in FIFA competitions.[154]

While FIFA is responsible for organising international competitions and enforcing most international regulations, the Laws of the Game are set by the IFAB, where each of the four UK associations holds one vote and FIFA collectively holds four votes.[51]

International competitions

International competitions in association football principally consist of two varieties: competitions involving representative national teams or those involving clubs based in multiple nations and national leagues. International football, without qualification, most often refers to the former.[155] In the case of international club competition, it is the country of origin of the clubs involved, not the nationalities of their players, that renders the competition international in nature.[156]

The major international competition in football and the most prestigious is the World Cup, organised by FIFA. This competition has taken place every four years since 1930, with the exception of the 1942 and 1946 tournaments, which were cancelled because of World War II. As of 2022, over 200 national teams compete in qualifying tournaments within the scope of continental confederations for a place in the finals.[157] The finals tournament involved 32 national teams (expanding to 48 teams for the 2026 tournament) competing over a four-week period.[158][e] The World Cup is the world's most widely viewed and most followed sporting event, with the 2022 tournament estimated to be watched by 5 billion people, more than 60% of the global population.[159] The 1958 World Cup saw the emergence of Pelé as a global sporting star, a period that coincided with "the explosive spread of television, which massively amplified his presence everywhere".[160] The current champions are Argentina, who won their third title at the 2022 tournament in Qatar.[161] The FIFA Women's World Cup has been held every four years since 1991. Under the tournament's current format that was expanded in 2023, national teams vie for 31 slots in a three-year qualification phase, while the host nation's team enters automatically as the 32nd slot.[162] The current champions are Spain, after winning their first title in the 2023 tournament.[163]

There has been a football tournament at every Summer Olympic Games since 1900, except at the 1932 games in Los Angeles when FIFA and the International Olympic Committee (IOC) had disagreed over the status of amateur players.[164][165] Before the inception of the World Cup, the Olympics (especially during the 1920s) were the most prestigious international event. Originally, the tournament was for amateurs only.[50] As professionalism spread around the world, the gap in quality between the World Cup and the Olympics widened. The countries that benefited most were the Soviet Bloc countries of Eastern Europe, where top athletes were state-sponsored while retaining their status as amateurs. Between 1948 and 1980, 23 out of 27 Olympic medals were won by Eastern Europe, with only Sweden (gold in 1948 and bronze in 1952), Denmark (bronze in 1948 and silver in 1960) and Japan (bronze in 1968) breaking their dominance. For the 1984 Los Angeles Games, the IOC allowed professional players to compete. Since 1992, male competitors must be under 23 years old, although since 1996, three players over the age of 23 have been allowed per squad.[166] A women's tournament was added in 1996; in contrast to the men's event, full international sides without age restrictions play the women's Olympic tournament.[167]

After the World Cup, the most important international football competitions are the continental championships, which are organised by each continental confederation and contested between national teams. These are the European Championship (UEFA), the Copa América (CONMEBOL), the Africa Cup of Nations (CAF), the Asian Cup (AFC), the Gold Cup (CONCACAF) and the Nations Cup (OFC).[168] These competitions are not strictly limited to members of the continental confederations, with guest teams from other continents sometimes invited to compete.[169] The FIFA Confederations Cup was contested by the winners of all six continental championships, the current FIFA World Cup champions, and the country which was hosting the next World Cup. This was generally regarded as a warm-up tournament for the upcoming FIFA World Cup and did not carry the same prestige as the World Cup itself.[168] The tournament was discontinued following the 2017 edition, with its calendar slot replaced by an expanded FIFA Club World Cup.[170] The Finalissima was revived in 2022, and is contested between the Copa América and European Championship winners.[171] The UEFA Nations League and the CONCACAF Nations League were introduced in the late 2010s to replace international friendlies during the two-year cycle between major tournaments.[172]

The most prestigious competitions in club football are the respective continental championships, which are generally contested between national champions, for example, the UEFA Champions League in Europe and the Copa Libertadores in South America. The winners of each continental competition contest the FIFA Intercontinental Cup, held annually, and the FIFA Club World Cup, held once every four years.[173]

Domestic competitions

In each country, football clubs are usually federated in associations or leagues that organise official tournaments among themselves, from which the champion of each country and the teams that will participate in international club tournaments emerge. There is no single system of competitions, and each national league organises them according to its own traditions.[175]

The governing bodies in each country operate league systems in a domestic season, normally comprising several divisions, in which the teams gain points throughout the season depending on results, usually three points for a win, one for a draw and zero for a defeat. Teams are put into tables, placed in order according to points accrued. In the Old World (Africa, Asia and Europe), it is common for each team to play every other team in its league at home and away in each season, in a round-robin tournament. At the end of a season, which typically runs from August to May, the top team is declared the champion. The top few teams may be promoted to a higher division, and one or more of the teams finishing at the bottom are relegated to a lower division.[176]

Some exceptions to this system occur in the New World (Americas) and Australia:

The majority of the Latin American leagues (including Liga MX from Mexico and Liga Profesional de Fútbol from Argentina) divide football championships into two sections named Apertura and Clausura (Spanish for Opening and Closing), awarding a champion for each.[177] After a first phase using points in a round-robin tournament, these leagues usually have a knockout phase, with a final deciding the champion of each Apertura and Clausura tournament. In some countries, such as Uruguay,[178] the winners of the Apertura and Clausura play each other in a play-off for the season title.
The Brazilian Série A ("Brasileirão") uses a single-season double round-robin format to determine the champion, similar to most European leagues, although it is played from April or May to December.[179] Brazilian clubs also participate in state leagues from January to April, and at least one state league, the Campeonato Carioca in Rio de Janeiro, had a split season format until 2020.[180] However, Brazil has never used an Apertura and Clausura system in its national tournament, instead employing various formats with play-offs until 2002.[181]
Major League Soccer in the United States and Canada uses a closed league system (without promotion and relegation) and a conference system, similar to that used in other sports leagues in both countries. In each conference, clubs play a round-robin schedule during the regular season, and those with the most points qualify for the play-offs, which conclude with a final to determine the champion.[182]
The A-League in Australia also uses a closed league system. At the end of a regular season played in a round-robin format, the clubs with the most points compete in play-offs to determine the league champion.[183]

The teams finishing at the top of a country's league may also be eligible to play in international club competitions in the following season. Most countries supplement the league system with one or more "cup" competitions organised on a knock-out basis. These include the domestic cup, which may be open to all eligible teams in a country's league system—both professional and amateur—and is organised by the national federation.[184]

Some countries' top divisions feature highly-paid star players; in smaller countries, lower divisions, and many women's clubs, players may be part-timers with a second job, or amateurs. The top five European leagues – Premier League (England),[185] Bundesliga (Germany), La Liga (Spain), Serie A (Italy), and Ligue 1 (France) – attract most of the world's best players and, during the 2006–07 season, each of these leagues had a total wage cost in excess of €600 million.[186] These leagues also generated a combined €17.2 billion in revenue in the 2021–22 season from television contracts, matchday tickets, sponsorships, and other sources.[187] In the 2022–23 season, clubs in Europe's "big five" leagues had an aggregate wage cost of €13 billion, with each league spending more than €1.8 billion in wages. In contrast, the combined revenue of these leagues was €19.6 billion.[188]

Variants and casual play

Variants of association football have been codified for teams of reduced size, such as five-a-side football; for non-traditional playing environments, including beach soccer, futsal and indoor soccer; and for athletes with disabilities (Paralympic football).

Street football can be played with only minimal equipment – a basic game can be played on almost any open area of reasonable size with just a ball made from almost any material and items to mark the positions of the goalposts.[189][190] Such informal games can have team sizes that vary from eleven-a-side, can use a limited or modified subset of the official rules, and can be self-officiated by the players.[191]

See also

Women's association football portal

List of association football films
List of association football video games
Lists of association football clubs

Notes

^ For further information, see names for association football.

^ See Football#Early history for more information.

^ a b See List of types of football#Games descended from the FA rules for a list of association football variations.

^ For example, the English Premier League fined and levied an 8-match suspension on Luis Suárez for racially abusing Patrice Evra.

^ The number of competing teams has varied over the history of the competition.

References

^ "In a globalised world, the football World Cup is a force for good". The Conversation. 10 July 2014. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 11 July 2014.

^ "MLS as a Sports Product—The Prominence of the World's Game in the U.S. - Working Paper – Faculty & Research". Harvard Business School. Archived from the original on 29 January 2023. Retrieved 29 January 2023.

^ a b c "History of Football – Britain, the home of Football". FIFA. Archived from the original on 28 March 2013.

^ "History of Football – The Origins". FIFA. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 29 April 2013.

^ a b c d "Procedures to determine the winner of a match or home-and-away" (PDF). Laws of the Game 2010/2011. FIFA. pp. 51–52. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 March 2011. Retrieved 4 March 2011.

^ "2002 FIFA World Cup TV Coverage". FIFA. 5 December 2006. Archived from the original on 14 March 2005. Retrieved 6 January 2008.

^ "Champions League final tops Super Bowl for TV market". BBC Sport. British Broadcasting Corporation. 31 January 2010. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 25 February 2010.

^ "Champions League final vs Super Bowl: which is the most watched sporting event?". AS.com. 1 June 2024. Archived from the original on 7 February 2025. Retrieved 27 October 2024.

^ a b "Football Association 1863 Minute Book". British Library. Archived from the original on 13 September 2024. Retrieved 13 April 2025.

^ a b "Etymology of "soccer" by etymonline". Online Etymology Dictionary. Archived from the original on 6 April 2025. Retrieved 13 April 2025.

^ Perrigo, Billy (11 July 2018). "Why Do Americans Call It Soccer Instead of Football? Blame England". Time. Time Magazine. Archived from the original on 11 January 2024. Retrieved 11 January 2024.

^ Clarke, Donald (3 July 2021). "There is no easier way to annoy a British soccer fan than referring to soccer as 'soccer'". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022.

^ "What's The Origin of the Word "Soccer"?". Lexico Dictionaries | English. Archived from the original on 2 May 2021. Retrieved 22 March 2021.

^ "The History of Football in England". English Heritage. Archived from the original on 11 April 2025. Retrieved 22 October 2024.

^ Manfred, Tony (14 June 2014). "The real reason Americans call it 'soccer' is all England's fault". Business Insider Australia. Archived from the original on 27 April 2021. Retrieved 27 April 2021.

^ Cunningham, John M. "Why Do Some People Call Football "Soccer"?". Britannica. Archived from the original on 31 January 2022. Retrieved 23 December 2021.

^ "Editorial: Soccer – or should we say football – must change". New Zealand Herald. 11 June 2014. Archived from the original on 27 April 2021. Retrieved 27 April 2021.

^ a b Item (NAMA) 873 Archived 22 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine displayed at the National Archaeological Museum, Athens

^ a b "Origins of Cuju in China". www.fifamuseum.com. Archived from the original on 13 January 2023.

^ "Sports". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 20 April 2021.

^ a b "Classic Football History of the Game". FIFA. Archived from the original on 25 December 2012. Retrieved 17 September 2013.

^ a b Murray, Scott (2010). Football For Dummies. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 33–. ISBN 978-0-470-66440-7. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 20 April 2021.

^ Yang, Lin (2018). "Chinese Ju and World Football". Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research. 120: 276–281.

^ "History of Football – The Origins". FIFA. Archived from the original on 3 August 2015. Retrieved 15 December 2017.

^ Chadwick, Simon; Hamil, Sean, eds. (2010). Managing Football: An International Perspective. London: Routledge. p. 458. ISBN 978-1-136-43763-2. Archived from the original on 20 November 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2018.

^ "History of Football, Part 2: The Aztec and The Oriental Version of the Game". Bleacher Report. 29 January 2009. Archived from the original on 19 February 2023.

^ Roberts, Mike (13 April 2011). "Little Brothers of War Ball games in Pre-Colombian North America". The same old game: the true story of the ancient origins of football. Barcelona: RobertsBCN Publications. ISBN 978-1-4610-9319-0. OCLC 1022073321. Archived from the original on 12 February 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2021.

^ "A gripping Greek derby". FIFA. 8 March 2013. Archived from the original on 2 November 2020. Retrieved 30 October 2020.

^ a b "Fury as FIFA finds a field of dreams in China". Bangkok Post. 5 June 2014. Archived from the original on 18 March 2023. Retrieved 19 June 2014.

^ Nigel Wilson, Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece, Routledge, 2005, p. 310

^ Nigel M. Kennell, The Gymnasium of Virtue: Education and Culture in Ancient Sparta (Studies in the History of Greece and Rome), The University of North Carolina Press, 1995, on Google Books Archived 5 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine

^ Steve Craig, Sports and Games of the Ancients: (Sports and Games Through History), Greenwood, 2002, on Google Books Archived 6 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine

^ Don Nardo, Greek and Roman Sport, Greenhaven Press, 1999, p. 83

^ Sally E. D. Wilkins, Sports and games of medieval cultures, Greenwood, 2002, on Google books Archived 6 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Calcio e historia del Fútbol" (in Spanish). ExpertFootball.com. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2025.

^ Jusserand, Jean-Jules. (1901). Le sport et les jeux d'exercice dans l'ancienne France. Retrieved 11 January 2008, from http://agora.qc.ca/reftext.nsf/Documents/Football--Le_sport_et_les_jeux_dexercice_dans_lancienne_France__La_soule_par_Jean-Jules_Jusserand Archived 7 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine (in French)

^ Ruff, Julius (2001). Violence in Early Modern Europe 1500–1800. Cambridge University Press. p. 170. ISBN 978-0-521-59894-1.

^ "Rugby Football History". Rugby Football History. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 19 June 2014.

^ "History of Football – Britain, the home of Football". FIFA. Archived from the original on 1 July 2007. Retrieved 20 November 2006.

^ Bailey, Steven (1995). "Living Sports History: Football at Winchester, Eton and Harrow". The Sports Historian. 15 (1): 34–53. doi:10.1080/17460269508551675.

^ Harvey, Adrian (2005). Football, the first hundred years. London: Routledge. p. 126. ISBN 978-0-415-35018-1.

^ Winner, David (28 March 2005). "The hands-off approach to a man's game". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 23 January 2014. Retrieved 7 October 2007.

^ a b c "History of the FA". The Football Association. Archived from the original on 25 January 2013. Retrieved 9 October 2007.

^ "The Football Association". Bell's Life in London. 28 November 1863. p. 6. Archived from the original on 20 September 2023. Retrieved 18 September 2023.

^ Young, Percy M. (1964). Football in Sheffield. S. Paul. pp. 28–29.

^ "The History of the Football League". The Football League. 22 September 2010. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 4 March 2011.

^ Parrish, Charles; Nauright, John (2014). Soccer around the World: A Cultural Guide to the World's Favorite Sport. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. p. 78. ISBN 978-1-61069-302-8. Archived from the original on 26 October 2019. Retrieved 8 December 2018.

^ "IFAB". FIFA. Archived from the original on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 10 December 2011.

^ "The International FA Board". FIFA. Archived from the original on 22 April 2007. Retrieved 2 September 2007.

^ a b "Where it all began". FIFA. Archived from the original on 8 June 2007. Retrieved 8 June 2007.

^ a b "The IFAB: How it works". FIFA. 4 March 2010. Archived from the original on 29 January 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2020.

^ a b c Townsend, Jon (30 May 2015). "The continental kings of Europe and South America". These Football Times. Archived from the original on 6 October 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2023.

^ "FIFA Council approves key organisational elements of the FIFA World Cup". FIFA. 27 October 2017. Archived from the original on 24 December 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2023.

^ a b c d Sarkar, Dhiman (8 December 2022). "Why Europe and South America dominate World Cup". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2023.

^ Rubio, Alberto; Sam (10 February 2023). "The reasons why South American teams are now struggling at the Club World Cup". MARCA. Archived from the original on 12 February 2023. Retrieved 25 February 2023.

^ Robinson, Mark (31 August 2018). "Can Caribbean football make an impact at international level?". Caribbean Beat Magazine. Archived from the original on 1 December 2021. Retrieved 25 February 2023.

^ "How Oceania fell off the FIFA map". The Sydney Morning Herald. 16 August 2003. Archived from the original on 25 February 2023. Retrieved 25 February 2023.

^ Ingle, Sean; Glendenning, Barry (9 October 2003). "Baseball or Football: which sport gets the higher attendance?". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 11 April 2008. Retrieved 5 June 2006.

^ "TV Data". FIFA. Archived from the original on 22 September 2007. Retrieved 2 September 2007.

^ "2014 FIFA World Cup reached 3.2 billion viewers, one billion watched final". FIFA. 16 December 2015. Archived from the original on 19 December 2015. Retrieved 17 March 2017.

^ "FIFA Survey: approximately 250 million footballers worldwide" (PDF). FIFA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 September 2006. Retrieved 15 September 2006.

^ "2006 FIFA World Cup broadcast wider, longer and farther than ever before". FIFA. 6 February 2007. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2009.

^ Kapuscinski, Ryszard (2007). The Soccer War.

^ Stormer, Neil (20 June 2006). "More than a game". Common Ground News Service. Archived from the original on 26 June 2010. Retrieved 2 March 2010.

^ Austin, Merrill (10 July 2007). "Best Feet Forward". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 28 February 2010. Retrieved 2 March 2010.

^ Dart, James; Bandini, Paolo (21 February 2007). "Has football ever started a war?". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 29 October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ Drezner, Daniel (4 June 2006). "The Soccer Wars". The Washington Post. p. B01. Archived from the original on 3 October 2018. Retrieved 21 May 2008.

^ "Genesis of 'The Global Game'". The Global Game. Archived from the original on 21 May 2006. Retrieved 22 May 2006.

^ "The Chinese and Tsu Chu". The Football Network. Archived from the original on 6 November 2012. Retrieved 1 May 2006.

^ a b c "A Brief History of Women's Football". Scottish Football Association. Archived from the original on 8 March 2005. Retrieved 18 November 2013.

^ a b "A game of two sexes". The Herald. Glasgow. 8 February 1997. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017.

^ a b "Women's Football History". The Football Association. Archived from the original on 25 March 2009.

^ a b c d e Gregory, Patricia (3 June 2005). "How women's football battled for survival". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 2 December 2017. Retrieved 19 February 2010.

^ Campbell, Alan (19 October 2012). "No longer the game of two-halves". The Herald. Herald & Times Group. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 9 March 2014.

^ Ladda, Shawn. "Women's involvement with soccer was part of the emancipation process". SoccerTimes. Archived from the original on 16 November 2006. Retrieved 4 May 2006.

^ Mårtensson, Stefan (June 2010). "Branding women's football in a field of hegemonic masculinity". Entertainment and Sports Law Journal. 8 (1): 5. doi:10.16997/eslj.44. ISSN 1748-944X.

^ "The Dick, Kerr Ladies' FC". Donmouth. Archived from the original on 21 May 2022. Retrieved 16 February 2023.

^ "BBC Radio 4 – Home Front – The Forgotten First International Women's Football Match". BBC. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. Retrieved 16 February 2023.

^ Leighton, Tony (10 February 2008). "FA apologies for 1921 ban". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 6 August 2014.

^ a b Alexander, Shelley (3 June 2005). "Trail-blazers who pioneered women's football". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 2 December 2017. Retrieved 19 February 2010.

^ Witzig, Richard (2006). The Global Art of Soccer. CusiBoy Publishing. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-9776688-0-9. Archived from the original on 1 June 2021. Retrieved 6 August 2014.

^ a b Wrack, Suzanne (13 June 2022). "How the FA banned women's football in 1921 and tried to justify it". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 14 February 2023. Retrieved 16 February 2023.

^ Newsham, Gail (2014). In a League of Their Own. The Dick, Kerr Ladies 1917–1965. Paragon Publishing.

^ "Women footballers: Born with talent, held back by prejudice". BBC News. 28 February 2018. Archived from the original on 7 November 2022. Retrieved 16 February 2023.

^ Lasserre, Victoria (7 July 2022). "5 dates clefs sur l'histoire du football féminin". Cosmopolitan.fr (in French). Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 16 February 2023.

^ Wünsch, Silke (20 June 2011). "Female footballers". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 24 July 2022. Retrieved 16 February 2023.

^ Pecci, Giulio (5 November 2018). "The reinassance of women's football in Italy". NSS Magazine. Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2023.

^ a b "History of women's football". The Football Association. Archived from the original on 24 February 2020. Retrieved 16 February 2023.

^ Kleen, Brendon (21 December 2022). "Women's Football Is Growing in the Middle East and North Africa". Global Sport Matters. Archived from the original on 29 January 2023. Retrieved 25 February 2023.

^ "Tournaments: Women's World Cup". FIFA. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 11 March 2011.

^ Glass, Alana (21 October 2019). "FIFA Women's World Cup Breaks Viewership Records". Forbes. Archived from the original on 24 April 2021. Retrieved 24 April 2021.

^ "With 100 days to Women's World Cup, calls for gender equity grow". Al Jazeera. 11 April 2023. Archived from the original on 18 May 2023. Retrieved 27 October 2024.

^ "Women's World Cup ticket sales break record with close to 1.4m sold on eve of 2023 tournament". The Guardian. 19 July 2023. Archived from the original on 19 July 2023. Retrieved 27 October 2024.

^ Moore, Kevin (2015). "Football and the Olympics and Paralympics". In Hassan, David; Mitra, Shakya (eds.). The Olympic Games: Meeting New Global Challenges. London: Routledge. p. 68. ISBN 978-0-415-74176-7. Archived from the original on 26 October 2019. Retrieved 8 January 2019.

^ "Women's World Cup: USWNT results at each tournament". 6 August 2023. Archived from the original on 22 April 2024. Retrieved 22 April 2024.

^ "FIFA Women's World Cup History – Past World Cup Winners, Hosts, Most Goals and more". FOX Sports. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2023.

^ Kelly, Ryan (8 August 2021). "Which country has won the most Olympic gold medals in football?". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 10 November 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2023.

^ Rey, Debora (7 July 2022). "South American women's soccer improving but some way to go". AP NEWS. Archived from the original on 28 November 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2023.

^ "Circumference". FIFA Quality Programme. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016.

^ "How to head a football". Archived from the original on 3 April 2011. Retrieved 3 January 2011.

^ a b c "Laws of the game (Law 12)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ "Law 11 – Offside" (PDF). Laws of the Game 2010/2011. FIFA. p. 31. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2010. Retrieved 4 March 2011.

^ a b c "Laws of the game (Law 8)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ Ducker, James (5 December 2023). "Seven graphs that explain the Premier League's goal glut". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 16 December 2023. Retrieved 21 January 2024.

^ a b "Laws of the game (Law 3–Number of Players)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ "Soccer positions explained: names, numbers and what they do". Bundesliga. Archived from the original on 28 February 2021. Retrieved 3 February 2021.

^ Winter, Henry (2 April 2016). "Schmeichel: I watch Federer to improve my game". The Times. Archived from the original on 11 April 2025. Retrieved 7 April 2025.

^ "Positions guide, Who is in a team?". BBC Sport. 1 September 2005. Archived from the original on 5 November 2006. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ "Formations". BBC Sport. 1 September 2005. Archived from the original on 25 August 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ "Laws of the Game". FIFA. Archived from the original on 1 September 2007. Retrieved 2 September 2007.

^ "Offside and handball laws under Ifab review along with concussion substitutions". BBC Sport. 29 February 2020. Archived from the original on 31 January 2021. Retrieved 3 December 2020.

^ Reilly, Thomas; Williams, A. Mark, eds. (2005). Science and Soccer (Second ed.). London: Routledge. p. 235. ISBN 978-0-415-26231-6. Archived from the original on 12 February 2022. Retrieved 3 December 2020.

^ Maurer, Pablo. "How U.S. soccer experimented with 10 changes to the game before launching MLS". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 8 November 2021.

^ "Comparative Study of Rules of Laws (2024)" (PDF). NFHS. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 September 2024. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

^ "Health Advice for Boys". Strikingeagles.tripod.com. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 24 September 2013.

^ "Soccer Position Paper" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 24 September 2013.

^ "Football's biggest headache". Marca. Spain. 12 March 2017. Archived from the original on 17 May 2018. Retrieved 17 May 2018.

^ "Laws of the game (Law 4–Players' Equipment)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ "Five substitutions permitted in all top-level competitions from 2022/23". 90min.com. 13 June 2022. Archived from the original on 13 January 2023. Retrieved 13 January 2023.

^ "Laws of the game (Law 3–Substitution procedure)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ "Law 3 – The Number of Players" (PDF). Laws of the Game 2010/2011. FIFA. p. 62. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2010. Retrieved 4 March 2011.

^ "Laws of the game (Law 5 – The referee)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ "Video Assistant Referees (VARs) Experiment – Protocol (Summary)". International Football Association Board. 26 April 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2017.

^ "Laws of the Game 2013/2014" (PDF). FIFA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 July 2013.

^ "Football manufacturing". FIFA quality program. FIFA. Archived from the original on 4 September 2016. Retrieved 3 July 2014.

^ Summers, Chris (2 September 2004). "Will we ever go completely metric?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 October 2007. Retrieved 7 October 2007.

^ "Goal-line technology put on ice". FIFA. 8 March 2008. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 19 June 2010.

^ "FIFA Amendments to the Laws of the Game, 2008" (PDF). FIFA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 4 March 2011.

^ "Laws of the game (Law 1.1 – The field of play)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ "Laws of the game (Law 1.4 – The Field of play)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ "Laws of the game (Law 1.3 – The field of play)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ a b "Laws of the game (Law 7.2 – The duration of the match)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007.

^ "Interpretation of the Laws of the Game – Law 07" (PDF). FIFA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2012.

^ "Law 7 – The Duration of the Match" (PDF). FIFA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2011.

^ "Football reforms: Scrapping 45-minute half to be debated at Ifab". BBC Sport. 18 June 2017. Archived from the original on 22 March 2018. Retrieved 7 March 2018.

^ We Timed Every Game. World Cup Stoppage Time Is Wildly Inaccurate Archived 12 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine, David Bunnell, FiveThirtyEight, 27 June 2018

^ The Sunday Times Illustrated History of Football Reed International Books Limited 1996. p. 11 ISBN 1-85613-341-9

^ "Laws of the game (Law 7.3 – The duration of the match)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 19 October 2007. Retrieved 3 March 2010.

^ For example, in the FA Cup prior to the semi-finals.

^ "Laws of the Game 2023/24". Documents | IFAB. IFAB. p. 151. Archived from the original on 18 April 2024. Retrieved 9 April 2025.

^ "Laws of the game (Law 15 – The Throw-in)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 14 October 2007.

^ "Laws of the game (Law 16 – The Goal Kick)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 14 October 2007.

^ "Laws of the game (Law 17 – The Corner Kick)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 14 October 2007.

^ a b "Laws of the game (Law 13 – Free Kicks)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 14 October 2007.

^ "Laws of the game (Law 14 – The Penalty Kick)". FIFA. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 14 October 2007.

^ "How cards for managers has improved behaviour in the technical area". The Independent. 13 May 2020. Archived from the original on 13 January 2023. Retrieved 13 January 2023.

^ "Referee's signals: advantage". BBC Sport. 14 September 2005. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2011.

^ "Law 5: The Referee: Advantage" (PDF). Laws of the Game 2010/2011. FIFA. p. 66. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2010. Retrieved 4 March 2011.

^ "Law 5: The Referee" (PDF). The Laws of the Game. FIFA. p. 24. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 August 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2012.

^ a b For example, see the Football Association's rules regarding player suspensions in FA competitions: "Disciplinary procedures". The Football Association. Archived from the original on 6 November 2016. Retrieved 1 February 2016.

^ "Football League administration penalty raised to 12 points". BBC Sport. 5 June 2015. Archived from the original on 4 August 2018. Retrieved 17 May 2018.

^ "FIFA Disciplinary Code" (PDF). FIFA. 2011. p. 21. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 November 2011. Retrieved 9 August 2016.

^ a b "Member Associations". FIFA. Archived from the original on 20 February 2023. Retrieved 20 February 2023.

^ Vázquez, Luis Guillermo; Hall, Andy (9 October 2024). "Which CONCACAF teams are not recognized by FIFA?". AS USA. Archived from the original on 10 November 2024. Retrieved 11 April 2025.

^ Whitmore, Jonny (22 July 2021). "5 Key Differences Between International and Club Football". Opta Analyst. Archived from the original on 24 March 2025. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

^ "2020 Concacaf Champions League Draw Preview". New York City FC. 6 December 2019. Archived from the original on 11 April 2025. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

^ Ansari, Aarish (14 June 2022). "FIFA World Cup 2022: Brazil, Germany, England among confirmed teams for Qatar". Olympics. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2023.

^ Mayorquin, Orlando (19 November 2022). "How does the World Cup work? The ultimate soccer showcase, explained". USA Today. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023.

^ "Qatar 2022 to be watched by 5bn people, says Gianni Infantino". SportsPro. 25 May 2022. Archived from the original on 14 November 2022. Retrieved 27 October 2024.

^ Goldblatt, David (29 December 2022). "Pelé set the standards by which footballing greatness is judged". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 October 2023. Retrieved 18 September 2023.

^ Mcnulty, Phil (18 December 2022). "Argentina win dramatic World Cup final on penalties". BBC Sport. BBC. Archived from the original on 18 December 2022. Retrieved 19 December 2022.

^ Lewis, Russell (23 July 2023). "The Women's World Cup expanded to 32 teams this year. Has the quality suffered?". NPR. Archived from the original on 31 August 2023. Retrieved 31 August 2023.

^ Peterson, Anne M. (20 August 2023). "From turmoil to triumph, Spain earns its first Women's World Cup title with a 1-0 win over England". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 23 August 2023. Retrieved 31 August 2023.

^ "Football at the 1936 Berlin Summer Games". Sports Reference. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 6 December 2023.

^ "Football Equipment and History". International Olympic Committee (IOC). Archived from the original on 6 July 2014. Retrieved 4 March 2011.

^ "Football: Five superstars who have won gold in the Olympics". Olympics.com. Archived from the original on 6 June 2023. Retrieved 18 September 2023.

^ Borg, Simon (7 August 2021). "Olympic soccer rules, explained: How men's and women's football tournaments work in Tokyo". The Sporting News. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023.

^ a b Molinaro, John F. (22 May 2009). "Continental champions collide at the Confederations Cup". CBC Sports. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023.

^ Williams, Aidan (12 June 2019). "Japan, Qatar and the history of guest teams at the Copa América". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023.

^ "2021 FIFA Club World Cup to remain a seven-team tournament". The Athletic. 4 December 2020. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023.

^ "European and South American champions meet in 'Finalissima' Wembley showdown". UEFA.com. 22 March 2022. Archived from the original on 28 March 2025. Retrieved 9 April 2025.

^ Straus, Brian (17 November 2017). "How CONCACAF League of Nations Alters Competitive Landscape for USA, Region". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 1 September 2023. Retrieved 31 August 2023.

^ "Organising Committee strengthens FIFA Club World Cup format". FIFA. 14 August 2007. Archived from the original on 31 May 2008. Retrieved 7 October 2007.

^ Philip, Tom (19 November 2015). "What the Hell is El Clásico?". GQ. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 8 September 2023.

^ "How is European soccer structured with leagues and cup competitions?". www.bundesliga.com. Archived from the original on 23 February 2025. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

^ Fort, Rodney (September 2000). "European and North American Sports Differences(?)". Scottish Journal of Political Economy. 47 (4): 431–55. doi:10.1111/1467-9485.00172.

^ "Estudiantes win Argentina Apertura title". Fox Sports. Associated Press. 13 December 2010. Archived from the original on 23 June 2013. Retrieved 4 March 2011. Under the system used in Argentina and most of Latin America, two season titles are awarded each year – the Apertura and Clausura.

^ "En Uruguay, Liverpool hizo historia con un ex Boca". Olé (in Spanish). 17 December 2023. Archived from the original on 21 September 2024. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

^ Oliveira, Letícia (10 April 2024). "Como funciona o Campeonato Brasileiro? Veja tudo sobre a competição". ge (in Portuguese). Rio de Janeiro. Archived from the original on 20 January 2025. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

^ Priori, Jorge (14 January 2025). "Uma solução para os campeonatos estaduais". Monitor Mercantil (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 18 January 2025. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

^ Parrela, Leonardo (12 April 2024). "A história do Campeonato Brasileiro: formatos e campeões". CNN Brasil (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 7 December 2024. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

^ "Competition Guidelines". MLS soccer. Archived from the original on 1 April 2025. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

^ "Official Documents and Rules". A-Leagues. Archived from the original on 14 March 2025. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

^ Rueter, Jeff (22 August 2023). "What is the U.S. Open Cup? Soccer tournament history, how to watch and Messi's path to another trophy". The Athletic. Archived from the original on 24 August 2023. Retrieved 8 September 2023.

^ Hughes, Ian (31 March 2008). "Premier League conquering Europe". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 18 November 2018. Retrieved 27 May 2008.

^ Taylor, Louise (29 May 2008). "Leading clubs losing out as players and agents cash in". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 7 April 2013. Retrieved 28 November 2008.

^ Buckingham, Philip (14 June 2023). "Premier League generated £5.5bn in 2021–22 – more than La Liga and Bundesliga combined". The Athletic. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023.

^ "Annual Review of Football Finance: Europe's Premier Leagues | Deloitte UK". www.deloitte.com. 25 June 2024. Archived from the original on 8 January 2025. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

^ Berlin, Jeremy; Hilltout, Jessica (1 February 2013). "Joy Is Round". National Geographic Magazine. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2020.

^ "Forget jumpers... these are the best makeshift goalposts". BBC Sport. 1 November 2014. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

^ "How street football shapes elite talent". Times of Malta. 27 March 2025. Archived from the original on 31 March 2025. Retrieved 8 April 2025.

External links

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityTravel information from Wikivoyage

Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) (in English, Arabic, French, German, and Spanish)
International Football Association Board (IFAB) (in English, French, German, and Spanish)
Association football at the Encyclopædia Britannica

vte

Amputee
Beach
Crab
Five-a-side
Futsal
Indoor
Freestyle
Keepie uppie
Footbag
Paralympic
Powerchair
Jorkyball
Roller
Rush goalie
Swamp
Street
Teqball
Three-sided
Walking

Futsal
Indoor

Footbag

Powerchair

AFLX
Lightning football
Metro footy
Nine-a-side
Rec footy
Variations

Gaelic football
Gaelic sevens

American
Eight-man
Flag
Nine-man
Seven-man
Six-man
Sprint
Touch
Wheelchair
Arena
Canadian

Eight-man
Flag
Nine-man
Seven-man
Six-man
Sprint
Touch
Wheelchair

League (XIIIs)
Masters
Mod
Nines
Sevens
Tag
Wheelchair
PD Rugby League

Masters
Mod
Nines
Sevens
Tag
Wheelchair
PD Rugby League

Union (XVs)
American flag
Beach
Mini
Sevens
Snow
Tag
Touch
Tens
X
Tambo
Touch
Wheelchair rugby ('murderball')

American flag
Beach
Mini
Sevens
Snow
Tag
Touch
Tens
X

Circle rules
Harrow
Lelo burti

Austus
Boston game
Eton field
Eton wall
International rules
Samoa rules
Speedball
Swedish
Universal
Volata

Association
Australian rules
Gridiron
American
Canadian
Gaelic
Rugby league
Rugby union

American
Canadian

Cambridge
Sheffield

Caid
Cuju
Calcio Fiorentino
English school games
Episkyros
Harpastum
La soule
Marn Grook
Medieval
Ba
Camping
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Old Division
Royal Shrovetide
Uppies and Downies

Ba
Camping
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Old Division
Royal Shrovetide
Uppies and Downies

American
Early
Modern
Association
Australian rules
Gaelic
Rugby league
Rugby union

Early
Modern

American and Canadian
American and rugby league
American and rugby union
Association and rugby union
Canadian and rugby league
Canadian and rugby union
Gaelic and Australian rules
Gaelic and rugby union
Rugby league and rugby union

American football card
Association football card
Australian rules football card
Rugby card

Attempts to ban football games
Oldest clubs
Oldest competitions

vte

History
Timeline
First league
First international
Oldest clubs
Oldest competitions
Attempts to ban the sport

Caid
Cuju
Calcio Fiorentino
English school games
Episkyros
Harpastum
La soule
Marn Grook
Medieval
Ba
Camping
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Old Division
Royal Shrovetide
Uppies and Downies

Ba
Camping
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Old Division
Royal Shrovetide
Uppies and Downies

Away goals rule
Ball
Ball in/out
Corner kick
Duration of the match
Equipment
Field
Fouls and misconduct
Free kick
Goal kick
Goal difference
Offside
Penalty kick
Penalty shoot-out
Players
Referee
Assistants
Scoring
Start and restart
Throw-in

Assistants

Sheffield rules
Cambridge rules

IFAB

Ball
Boots
Kit
Away colours
Third jersey
Throwback uniform

Away colours
Third jersey
Throwback uniform

Amputee
Beach
College
Crab
Five-a-side
Futsal
Indoor
Freestyle
Keepie uppie
Footbag
Paralympic
Powerchair
Jorkyball
Roller
Rush goalie
Seven-a-side (Sevens)
Swamp
Street
Three-sided
3v3 Soccer
Walking

Futsal
Indoor

Footbag

Powerchair

Goalkeeper
Defender
Midfielder
Forward

Formation
Tactics

Bicycle kick
Curl
Nutmeg
Rabona
Step over

Anti-football
Catenaccio
Tiki-taka
Total football
Zona mista
Equaliser

Trading cards

Barra brava
Curva
Hooliganism
Torcida
Ultras
Chant

Rugby union

FIFA
Africa
Asia
Europe
North & Central America
Oceania
South America

Summer Olympics
Youth Olympics

Competitions
Families
Players
Top scorers
Clubs (most successful clubs)
National teams

Competitions
Families
Players
Top scorers
Clubs (most successful clubs)
National teams

12th man
Alcohol
Association football films
Beautiful Game
Captain
Child abuse
Culture
Ethnicity
Football club
Geography
Homosexuality
IFFHS
Names
Politics
Professionalism
Racism
Retired numbers (list)
Rivalries (list)
RSSSF
Smoking
Squad number
Stadiums (list)
Stars on badges
Transfer
World XI

Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject

vte

FIFA
Federations
Teams
Competitions
World Rankings
The Best FIFA Football Awards
Timeline
Most successful clubs

FIFA World Cup
U-20
U-17
FIFA Confederations Cup
FIFA Gold Cup
Olympic Games 
Youth Olympic Games

U-20
U-17

AFC Asian Cup
U-23
U-20
U-17
AFC Challenge Cup
AFC Solidarity Cup
Asian Games
Regional
ASEAN
CAFA
EAFF
SAFF
WAFF
Arabian Gulf Cup
East Asian Games
Far Eastern Games
South Asian Games
Southeast Asian Games
West Asian Games

U-23
U-20
U-17

ASEAN
CAFA
EAFF
SAFF
WAFF
Arabian Gulf Cup
East Asian Games
Far Eastern Games
South Asian Games
Southeast Asian Games
West Asian Games

CAF Africa Cup of Nations
U-23
U-20
U-17
CAF African Nations Championship
African Games
Regional
CECAFA
COSAFA
UNIFFAC
WAFU
Central African Games
Indian Ocean Island Games

U-23
U-20
U-17

CECAFA
COSAFA
UNIFFAC
WAFU
Central African Games
Indian Ocean Island Games

CONCACAF Gold Cup
U-23
U-20
U-17
U-15
CONCACAF Championship
CONCACAF Nations League
CONCACAF Cup
NAFC Championship
CCCF Championship
Central America and Caribbean Games
Regional
North American Nations Cup
Copa Centroamericana
CFU Championship
Caribbean Cup
LIFA Cup
WIFA Cup
Central America Games

U-23
U-20
U-17
U-15

North American Nations Cup
Copa Centroamericana
CFU Championship
Caribbean Cup
LIFA Cup
WIFA Cup
Central America Games

CONMEBOL Copa América
U-23
U-20
U-17
U-15
South American Games
Regional
Bolivarian Games

U-23
U-20
U-17
U-15

Bolivarian Games

OFC Nations Cup
U-23
U-19
U-17
Pacific Games
Pacific Mini Games
Regional
Melanesia Cup
Polynesia Cup

U-23
U-19
U-17

Melanesia Cup
Polynesia Cup

UEFA European Championship
U-21
U-19
U-17
UEFA Nations League
Regional
Central European Cup
Balkan Cup
Baltic Cup
British Home Championship
Nordic Championship

U-21
U-19
U-17

Central European Cup
Balkan Cup
Baltic Cup
British Home Championship
Nordic Championship

CONMEBOL–UEFA Cup of Champions
Panamerican Championship
Afro-Asian Cup of Nations
AFC–OFC Challenge Cup
FIFA Arab Cup
Palestine Cup
Kuneitra Cup
Overseas Cup
Afro-Asian Games
Arab Games
Francophone Games
GANEFO
Goodwill Games
Islamic Games
Islamic Solidarity Games
Lusofonia Games
Mediterranean Cup
Mediterranean Games
Pan American Games

CONIFA World Football Cup
CONIFA European Football Cup
CONIFA South America Football Cup
CONIFA Africa Football Cup
FIFI Wild Cup
UIAFA Great European Tournament
Island Games
Micronesian Games
Universiade
World Unity Football Alliance

vte

FIFA
Federations
Teams
Competitions
World Ranking
Player of the Year
The Best FIFA Women's Player

Olympics
Youth Olympics
Universiade
African Games
Asian Games
Central America and Caribbean
Central American Games
Goodwill Games
Pan American Games
Pacific Games
Indian Ocean Island Games
South Asian Games
Southeast Asian Games
Island Games

Aisha Buhari Cup
Albena Cup
Algarve Cup
Aphrodite Women Cup
Arnold Clark Cup
Australia Cup
Balaton Cup
Baltic Cup
Brazil Cup
Chungua Cup
Cyprus Women's Cup
European Competition ('69,'79)
Cup of Nations
Finalissima
Four Nations Tournament
FIFA Invitation Tournament
Gold Cup
Istria Cup
Women's Kirin Challenge Cup
Malta International
Matchworld Cup
MS&AD Cup
Mundialito
Nordic Championship
Our Game Tournament
Peace Queen Cup
Pinatar Cup
Pink Ladies Cup
Revelations Cup
SAFF Women's Friendly Tournament
SheBelieves Cup
Sud Ladies Cup
Tournament of Nations
Tournoi de France
Turkish Women's Cup
Valais Cup
Vianet Championship
Women's World Cup ('70, '71)
Yongchuan International Tournament

Geography
Codes
Player of the Century
Men's football

vte

Law 1: The Field of Play
Law 2: The Ball
Law 3: The Number of Players
Law 4: The Players' Equipment
Law 5: The Referee
Law 6: The Other Match Officials
Law 7: The Duration of the Match
Law 8: The Start and Restart of Play
Law 9: The Ball In and Out of Play
Law 10: Determining the Outcome of a Match (scoring)
Law 11: Offside
Law 12: Fouls and Misconduct
Law 13: The Free Kick
Law 14: The Penalty Kick
Law 15: The Throw-In
Law 16: The Goal Kick
Law 17: The Corner Kick

Rugby union

The Football Association
 Scottish Football Association
 Football Association of Wales
 Irish Football Association
 FIFA

Sheffield Rules
Cambridge rules

vte

Expected goals
Formations
Laws
Media
Positions
Tactics
Variants

Anti-football
Total Football
Catenaccio
Tiki-taka
Zona mista

Behind the leg flip flap
Bicycle kick
Cruyff turn
Curl
Flip flap
Keepie uppie
Marseille turn
Nutmeg
Panenka
Rabona
Rainbow kick
Runaround move
Scorpion kick
Seal dribble
Step over
Volley

National teams
Africa
Asia
Europe
North America
Oceania
South America
Non-FIFA and former

Africa
Asia
Europe
North America
Oceania
South America
Non-FIFA and former

vte

Professionalism in association football
Geography of men's football
Geography of women's football

Football
Capeverdean football
English football
Malian football
Senegalese football
Scottish football
USA soccer

Prehistory of football
History of football
History of FIFA

1820s
1830s
1840s
1850s
1860s

1870
1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888
1889
1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909
1910
1911
1912
1913
1914
1915
1916
1917
1918
1919
1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025

vte

Chants
Songs dedicated to football
Vuvuzelas
Viking Thunder Clap

Barra brava
Curva
Hooliganism
Torcida organizada
Tifosi
Ultras

Church of Maradona
Makarapa
Sistine Chapel of Football

vte

Sport
Governing bodies
National sport
Sportspeople

Basketball
beach
deaf
3x3
water
wheelchair
Cestoball
Dueball
Korfball
Netball
Fast5
indoor
wheelchair
Rezball
Ringball
SlamBall

beach
deaf
3x3
water
wheelchair

Fast5
indoor
wheelchair

Australian rules football
AFLX
Lightning football
Metro footy
Nine-a-side
Rec footy
Gaelic football
Ladies'
Circle rules football

AFLX
Lightning football
Metro footy
Nine-a-side
Rec footy

Ladies'

Association football
amputee
beach soccer
freestyle
futsal
Indoor soccer
minifootball
paralympic
powerchair
roller soccer
socca
street

amputee
beach soccer
freestyle
futsal
Indoor soccer
minifootball
paralympic
powerchair
roller soccer
socca
street

American football
eight-man
flag
nine-man
six-man
sprint
touch
wheelchair
Arena football
Canadian football

eight-man
flag
nine-man
six-man
sprint
touch
wheelchair

Austus
Eton wall game
International rules football
Samoa rules
Speedball
Swedish football
Universal football
Volata

Ba' Game
Caid
Calcio fiorentino
Camping
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Cuju
Harpastum
Kemari
La soule
Lelo burti
Marn grook
Pasuckuakohowog
Royal Shrovetide
Uppies and downies

Rugby league
masters
mod
nines
sevens
tag
wheelchair
Rugby union
American flag
beach
mini
sevens
snow
tag
Tambo
touch
tens
X
Touch
Wheelchair

masters
mod
nines
sevens
tag
wheelchair

American flag
beach
mini
sevens
snow
tag
Tambo
touch
tens
X

Cuju
Kī-o-rahi
Jegichagi
Yubi lakpi

Bando
Cammag
Gateball
Hurling
Camogie
Super11s
Shinty–Hurling
Indigenous North American stickball
Iomain
Knattleikr
Knotty
Lacrosse
box/indoor
field
intercrosse
women's
Ritinis
Shinty
Shinty–Hurling

Camogie
Super11s
Shinty–Hurling

box/indoor
field
intercrosse
women's

Shinty–Hurling

Ball hockey
Bandy
rink
Broomball
Field hockey
indoor
Floor hockey
Floorball
Ice hockey
pond
power
ice sledge
Ringette
Rinkball
Roller hockey
in-line
quad
Rossall hockey
Shinny
Street hockey
Underwater hockey
Unicycle hockey

rink

indoor

pond
power
ice sledge

in-line
quad

Auto polo
Cowboy polo
Cycle polo
Elephant polo
Hobby horse polo
Horseball
Pato
Polo
Arena polo
Chovgan
Snow polo
Polocrosse
Segway polo
Yak polo

Arena polo
Chovgan
Snow polo

Angleball
Cycle ball
Flickerball
Goalball
Handball
beach
Czech
field
wheelchair
Home Ball
Motoball
Pushball
Quidditch
Roll ball
Underwater football
Underwater rugby
Water polo
canoe
inner tube
Whirlyball

beach
Czech
field
wheelchair

canoe
inner tube

Baseball
Baseball5
Brännboll
Corkball
Kickball
Matball
Over-the-line
Pesäpallo
Rounders
Schlagball
Softball
Fastpitch
16-inch
Stickball
Vitilla
British baseball
English baseball
Welsh baseball
Wiffle ball
Town ball
Wireball

Fastpitch
16-inch

English baseball
Welsh baseball

Cricket
One Day
Test
Twenty20
Indoor cricket
Vigoro

One Day
Test
Twenty20

Danish longball
Lapta
Oină
Stoolball

Ball badminton
Biribol
Bossaball
Fistball
Fives
Eton
Rugby
Footbag net
Football tennis
Footvolley
Jianzi
Jokgu
Newcomb ball
Peteca
Sepak takraw
teqball
Throwball
Volleyball
beach
indoor
sitting
standing
pioneerball
snow

Eton
Rugby

beach
indoor
sitting
standing
pioneerball
snow

Dodgeball
Gain-ground
Balle à la main
Ballon au poing
Jeu de paume
Longue paume
Kaatsen
Kin-Ball
Lagori
Mesoamerican ballgame
Pelota mixteca
Prisonball
Tamburello
Tchoukball
Ulama
Valencian pilota
Llargues
Yukigassen

Balle à la main
Ballon au poing
Jeu de paume
Longue paume

Llargues

Kabaddi
Kho kho
World Chase Tag

Synchronized swimming
Yacht racing

Airsoft
Bo-taoshi
Buzkashi
Combat (juggling)
Curling
wheelchair
Guts
Hornussen
Jereed
Makura-Nage
Paintball
Roller derby
Synchronized skating
Tug of war
Ultimate

wheelchair

vte

Aquatics
Artistic
Diving
Marathon Swimming
Swimming
Water polo
Archery
Athletics
Badminton
Basketball
3x3
Boxing
Canoeing
Canoe slalom
Canoe sprint
Cycling
BMX racing
Freestyle BMX
Mountain biking
Road cycling
Track cycling
Equestrian
Dressage
Eventing
Show jumping
Fencing
Field hockey
Football
Golf
Gymnastics
Artistic gymnastics
Rhythmic gymnastics
Trampolining
Handball
Judo
Modern pentathlon
Rowing
Rugby sevens
Sailing
Shooting
Skateboarding
Sport climbing
Surfing
Table tennis
Taekwondo
Tennis
Triathlon
Volleyball
Beach volleyball
Weightlifting
Wrestling
Freestyle wrestling
Greco-Roman wrestling

Artistic
Diving
Marathon Swimming
Swimming
Water polo

3x3

Canoe slalom
Canoe sprint

BMX racing
Freestyle BMX
Mountain biking
Road cycling
Track cycling

Dressage
Eventing
Show jumping

Artistic gymnastics
Rhythmic gymnastics
Trampolining

Beach volleyball

Freestyle wrestling
Greco-Roman wrestling

Baseball / Softball
Cricket
Flag football
Lacrosse
Squash

See also: Paralympic sports and Winter Olympic sports

FAST

GermanyUnited States2FranceBnF dataJapanCzech RepublicSpainIsrael

2

Historical Dictionary of SwitzerlandNARA

